

-% 



H/** 



il THE ABBEYNM'URE BOOKS 

O 

1— 
CO 



CO 



BRITISH INSECT, 

GENERAL) 



n 




\^ 



WPERCWiL 1ESTEIL, ELS. 







as* 

3v 



V/,^ 4^-^ 



J 



THE ABBEY NATURE BOOKS 
Edited by W. PERCIVAL WESTELL, F.L.S. 



BRITISH INSECTS 

(General) 




THE ABBEY NATURE BOOKS 

Coloured Plates and many Black and White Illustrations. 

BRITISH MAMMALS. 
BRITISH BIRDS (Double Volume). 
BRITISH REPTILES, AMPHIBIANS, AND FRESH- 
WATER FISHES. 
BRITISH BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 
BRITISH INSECTS (General). 

CHAPMAN & DODD, Ltd., 66 Great Queen St., London, 

W.C.2. 



Plate I 




BRITISH' Insects 
I. Soldier Beetle. 2. Demoiselle Dragon Fly. 3. Rose Chafer Beetle. 
4. Great Green Grasshopper. 5. Great Brown Water Heetle. 
6. Violet Ground Beetle. 






BRITISH INSECTS 

(General) 



BY 

W. PERCIVAL WESTELL, F.L.S. 



ILLUSTRATED BY 

DORIS MEYER 



CHAPMAN & DODD, LTD. 





74- 6. S^. 



Cahill & Co., Ltd., London, Dublin and Drogheda. 






INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

When it is pointed out that there are over one hundred 
and seventy different species of Caddis Flies in Britain 
alone, and several thousands of species of Ichneumons, 
the difficulty of compressing into one modest volume 
even a brief survey of British Insect Life will be realised. 
Whilst the members of the Order Lepidoptera (Butter- 
flies and Moths) have been accorded a volume of their 
own,* and thus relieved the congestion somewhat, there 
remained a mighty host to contend with in the general 
insecta, and it is with representatives of these that this 
fifth volume is concerned. It has been the author's 
aim to treat his subject more or less scientifically, and 
yet not be dry-as-dust, as a book on insect-life must, 
to be of any useful service, include scientific names, 
orders, families, and the rest. Popular books on these 
insect-marvels, whilst eminently readable, are of little 
use for identification or reference, and the idea has been 
to strike a happy medium by producing a tome that 
shall make a direct appeal to all Nature lovers, and yet 
have some value from the point of view already men- 
tioned. As it stands, it is claimed to be the most com- 
prehensive little volume yet published on British Insects 

* Volume IV, of " The Abbey Nature Books." 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE 



— a multum-in-parvo — and it is hoped that, as a result, 
these myriads of creatures will receive a greater share of 
attention than has heretofore been accorded them. It 
should be pointed out that the classification of Insects 
is being constantly altered, and whilst to-day the Orders 
herein included are mostly accepted, to-morrow may see 
the Fleas, for example, taken out of the Diptera, and 
placed elsewhere. There seems no finality, partly 
because we are only gradually acquiring sufficient in- 
formation for dealing with them, and many puzzles still 
exist. The aim has been to take the ten chief Orders of 
Insects represented in Britain, and to deal with them 
accordingly. The Author has largely followed the 
" Guide to the Exhibited Series of Insects in the Depart- 
ment of Entomology " at the British Museum (Natural 
History), and he has to acknowledge the courtesy of the 
Trustees of that wonderful Institution in loaning blocks 
of Figs. I, 2, 3, 4, II, 12, 13, 24, 27, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 
and 38, and to Mr. Ray Palmer, F.E.S., of Letchworth 
Museum, for helpful assistance in classification. Ack- 
nowledgment is also made of the use, as a work of re- 
ference, of the Author's recently published collaborative 
treatise : " Pests of the Garden and Orchard, Farm and 
Forest " (Palmer and Westell, Drane, Nov. 1922). 



V) 



CONTENTS 

Page 
Introduction i 

I. Order Aptera, or Spring-Tails and Bristle- 

Tails ..... 8 

Colletnbola, or Spring-Tails ... 9 

Thysanura, or Bristle-Tails . . . .11 

II. Order Mallophaga, OR Bird and Biting Lice . 14 



III. Order Orthoptera, or Earwigs, Cockroaches, 
Crickets, and Grasshoppers 
Forficulida, or Earwigs . . . 

Blattidce, or Cockroaches 
Gryllidce, or Crickets .... 
Phasgotiuridce, or Long-Horned Grasshoppers 
Locusttdce, or Short-Horned Grasshoppers 



16 

17 

20 

22 

25 
25 



IV. Order Rhynchota, or Bugs, Froth-Flies, 

Aphids, and Scale- Insects ... 28 
Hemiptera, or Bugs ..... 28 

Homoptera, or Froth-Flies, Aphids, and Scale- 
Insects ....... 28 



vn 



CONTENTS 



Page 

V. Order Coleoptera, or Beetles. ... 38 

Cicindelida, or Tiger Beetles ... 38 

Carabidce, or Carnivorous Ground Beetles . 39 

Gyn'nida, or Whirligig Beetles ... 40 

Dytiscidce, or Carnivorous Water Beetles . . 41 
Hydrophilida, or Vegetable Feeding Water 

Beetles ....... 43 

Staphylinidce, or Rove Beetles . . . 43 

Silphidce, or Carrion Beetles .... 44 

Coccinellidce, or Ladybird Beetles ... 45 
Byturidce, or Raspberry Beetles, &c. . -46 

5carai(«iW(S, or Chafer and Dor Beetles, &c. . 46 
Liicanidce, or Stag Beetles . . . -48 

Anobiida, or Death- Watch Beetles, &c. . . 50 

Lrtwzp^n'^,^, or Glow- Worm Beetles, &c. . 51 

Telephoridce, or Soldier and Sailor Beetles . 52 

Elateridce, or Click Beetles .... 52 

Melotdce, or Oil Beetles • • • • 53 

Ctircultomdce, or Weevils .... 54 

Scolytidce, or Bark Beetles .... 55 

Cerambycidce, or Wood-Boring Beetles . . 56 

Bruchidce, or Pea and Bean Beetles, &c. . . 57 

Chrysomelidce, or Leaf-Eating Beetles . . 58 

Z'£'«einomV/<s, or Grain Eating Beetles, &c. . 58 

Blaptidce, or Cellar Beetles .... 59 

viii 



CONTENTS 



Cassidldce, or Tortoise Beetles 

VI. Order Neuroptera, or Nerve- Winged Insects 

Corrodetitia, or Book Lice 

Plecoptera, or Stone Flies . 

Sialida, or Alder Flies 

Planipennia, or Scorpion Flies and Lacewings 

Ephemeroptera, or May Flies . 

Odonata, or Dragon Flies . 

VII. Order Trichoptera, or Caddis Flies 



Page 
60 

60 
61 
62 
62 
64 
66 
69 

73 



VIII. Order Lepidoptera, or Butterflies AND Moths 75 

(These are only included here so as to complete the ten 
chief Orders of British Insects, the Butterflies and Moths 
having been accorded a separate Volume to themselves in 
Book IV.) 



IX. Order Diptera, or Flies, Mosquitoes, Midges, 
AND Fleas . 
Pulicidce, or Fleas 
Cecidomyiidce, or Gall Midges 
Bibionidce, or Dung Flies 
Cidicida, or Mosquitoes (Gnats) 
Tipulidce, or Crane Flies 
Syrphidce, or Hover Flies 



76 

77 
78 
79 

79 

81 

81 



CONTENTS 



Tac///«/^<^, or Parasitic Flies. 

Mmcidce, or House Flies, &c 

CEstridce, or Bot Flies .... 

Hippoboscidce, or Mammal and Bird Flies 

Chironomidce, or Midges 

Tabanida, or Gad Flies 

Bombylidce, or Humble Bee Flies . 

X. Order Hymenoptera, or Ants, Bees, Wasps, 
Saw-flies, Ichneumons, and others 
Heterogyna, or Social Ants 
Fossores, or Solitary Ants 
Diphptera, or Wasps . 
Anthophila, or Bees 
Chrysidce, or Ruby Wasps 
Tenthredinida: , or Saw-Flies 
Cynipida, or Gall-Wasps 
Ichneumonidce, or Ichneumon Flies 



Page 

82 
82 

83 

84 

85 

85 
86 



87 

87 
89 

90 

94 
99 

lOI 

102 
104 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 



Coloured Plate I. i, Soldier Beetle. 2, Demoiselle 
Dragon-Fly. 3, Rose Chafer Beetle. 4, 
Great Green Grasshopper. 5, Great Brown 
Water Beetle. 6, Violet Ground Beetle 

Frontispiece 

Coloured Plate II. i , Yellow-Banded Humble Bee. 
2, Lacewing Fly. 3, Hornet. 4, Giant 



2. 

3- 

4- 

5- 
6. 

7- 
8. 

9- 
9a. 

10. 

II. 
12. 

13- 
14. 

16. 

17- 
18. 

19. 

20. 



Tailed Saw-Fly . . Facing Pag 


e 60 




Page 


Spring-Tail (Greatly enlarged) 


9 


Bristle-Tail (Enlarged seven times) . 


II 


Fish-Insect (Enlarged six times) 


13 


Dog Louse (Enlarged thirty-six times) 


• 15 


Cockroach 


20 


Mole Cricket 


22 


House Cricket 


. 24 


Water Boatman .... 


. 31 


Water Scorpion . . . . 


• 32 


Larva of Water Scorpion 


• 32 


Devil's Coach Horse Beetle 


. 40 


Great Brown Water Beetle (Larva) 


• 42 


(Pupa) 


. 42 


,, (Imago) 


• 42 


Burying Beetle .... 


. 44 


Cockchafer 


■ 47 


Dor Beetle 


. 48 


Stag Beetle 


. 49 


Glow- Worm Beetle (Female) 


. 51 


Oil Beetle 


. 53 


Elm Bark Beetle .... 


. 56 



XI 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 











Page 


Fig. 21. 


Musk Beetle . 


• 


• • « 


SI 


„ 22. 


Cellar Beetle . 


• 


• • 


59 


„ 23. 


Alder Fly (Imago) . 


• 


• • < 


63 


„ 24. 


„ „ (Larva enlarged) 


• • < 


63 


„ 25. 


Scorpion Fly . 




• 


64 


„ 26. 


Lacewing Fly . 




• • 


65 


„ 27. 


Mayfly (Nymph) 




• • 


67 


„ 28. 


(Imago) 




■ • 


67 


„ 29. 


Horse-Stinger . 




• • 


69 


„ 30- 


Great Dragon Fly . 




• • 


■ 71 


M 31- 


Caddis Fly (Larva. Tw 


ice 


natural size) 


73 


„ 32. 


„ (Imago). 




• • 


• 73 


.. 33- 


Common Flea (Egg) . 




• • 


• 77 


.. 34- 


„ (Larva) 




• • 


• 77 


M 35- 


„ (Pupa) 




• • 


• 77 


n 36. 


„ (Imago) 




• • 


• 77 


( 


[Figs. 33 to 36 enlarged twenty times). 




» 37- 


Common Gnat 


• 


• • 


. 80 


„ 38. 


Biting Midge (Greatly 


enlarged) 


■ 84 


» 39- 


Autumnal Breeze Fly 






. 85 


„ 40. 


Humble Bee Fly 






. 86 


„ 41- 


Wood Ant (Male) . 






. 89 


„ 42. 


Hornet 






. 90 


,> 43- 


Leaf-Cutter Bee 






• 94 


.» 44- 


Honey Bee (Queen) . 






. 96 


,. 45- 


„ (Drone) . 






. 96 


„ 46. 


„ „ (Worker) 






. 96 


» 47- 


Ruby Wasp 






• 99 


., 48. 


Giant-Tailed Saw-Fly 


(Female) 


. 100 


M 49- 


Gooseberry Saw-Fly 


• 


• • 


. lOI 



xu 



BRITISH INSECTS 

(General) 

Introduction. — The classification of the Insecta — 
even if attention is restricted to British species — is so 
often changed, and various methods adopted, by dif- 
ferent systematists, that it is difficult to set out with 
any degree of certainty a general rule that can be safely 
followed. For the purpose of this volume, however, it 
will be sufficient if we classify the insects with which 
we are here concerned under Ten Orders, commencing 
with the Bristle-Tails and Spring-Tails included in the 
Order Aptera, and concluding with the highly-organised 
Ants, Bees, and Wasps, which find a place in the Order 
Hymenoptera. 

In the ten Orders of Insects which are represented in 
this, and its companion volume : " British Butterflies 
and Moths," it is safe to assert that over seventeen 
thousand species are inhabitants of our own country, 
and whilst it is quite impossible to include more than a 
fraction of these in our present survey, it will perhaps 
afford interest if we set out the estimated number of 
British species in each Order, thus : — Aptera 200 species ; 

X 



BRITISH INSECTS 



Coleoptera 3,265 species ; Diptera 4,000 species ; Hyme- 
noptera 5,000 species ; Lepidoptera 2,060 species ; 
Mallophaga 150 species ; Neuroptera 228 species ; 
Orthoptera 42 species ; Rhynchota i ,500 species ; and 
Trichoptera 174 species, or, approximately, some 17,000 
species in all. I have purposely arranged the foregoing 
in alphabetical order, but to carry out one of the aims 
of this series of Abbey Nature Books further, namely, to 
convey some idea of the classification of British Animal 
Life, it will be as well to follow up the alphabetical 
sequence above given with the scientific one, indicating 
briefly the kinds of insects each of the Ten Orders 
contains, thus : — 

Order I (Aptera) is made up of the Bristle-Tails and 
Spring-Tails, which are wingless insects passing through 
no metamorphoses, the young (as in Spiders) resembling 
the adult except in size. Other characteristics are re- 
ferred to later, where we consider more fully the general 
life-histories of the diflFerent species accorded a place in 
this introductory handbook. 

Order II (Mallophaga) consists of Bird and Biting 
Lice, which, to say the least, are not likely to be very 
popularly regarded. These also are wingless creatures 
which, as in the Aptera, undergo very little change in the 
progress to maturity. 

Order III (Orthoptera) includes Cockroaches (so often 
erroneously referred to as " Black Beetles "), Crickets, 
Earwigs, and Grasshoppers, and it may here be men- 
tioned that the curious Praying Mantis which adopts 
2 



INTRODUCTION 



such a reverential attitude, and the ravenous Mosquito 
of other lands than ours, also belong to this important 
Order. 

Order IV (Rhynchota) has among its members the 
detestable Bed Bug {Cimcx Icctularius) ; those familiar 
little tenants of our ponds and streams, the Water Boat- 
man and Water Scorpion ; the active little Frog Hopper 
whose frothy secretion is such a feature of our country- 
side when Summer returns again ; the amazing Aphis, 
or Green Fly ; the Apple Sucker, and the Scale Insects. 
All these undergo an incomplete metamorphosis, and it 
may be mentioned that the Cicadas, whose stridulating 
music is such a feature of the regions they inhabit abroad, 
and the Lantern Flies, also find a place in this fourth 
Order, although unrepresented in Britain. 

Order V (Coleoptera) is made up of Sheath-Winged 
Insects, or Beetles, some large (as in the Great Water 
and Stag Beetles), others so small as almost to escape 
detection, and yet of perfect mechanism throughout, 
and all undergoing a complete metamorphosis. The 
useful Ladybirds are included among these coleopterous 
insects, and there are several other familiar representa- 
tives of which we have something to relate hereafter. 

Order VI (Neuroptera) may be conveniently divided 
into six Sub-Orders as follows : — 



1. Corrodentia, (Book Lice.) 

2. Plecoptera, (Stone Flies.) 

3. Sialida, (Alder FUes.) 



BRITISH INSECTS 



4. Planipennia, (Lacewing, Scorpion, and Snake 
Flies.) 

5. Ephemeroptera , (Mayflies.) 

6. Odonata, (Dragon Flies). 

Order VII {Trichoptera) includes the Caddis Flies 
whose larvae were used by us as bait for angling in some 
silvern stream, or favourite wayside pond, " when we 
were boys together." 

Order VIII (Lepidoptera) , as those who possess the 
fourth volume in this Series will know, embraces the 
Butterflies and Moths specially dealt with in the pre- 
ceding book. 

Order IX (Diptera) is made up of Fleas, Flies, Midges, 
and Mosquitoes, and is an Order capable of almost 
indefinite extension, in so far as adding to the number of 
species is concerned, owing to the fewness of the students 
who concentrate attention upon this highly important 
branch of Entomology, and 

Order X [Hymenoptera) has, as its representatives. Ants, 
Bees, Wasps, Saw Flies, Ichneumons, and Gall-Wasps. 

The many interesting phases through which these 
tenants of the world of insect-life pass is impossible 
of lengthy consideration, and they are more conveniently 
dealt with under their respective headings in the pages 
which follow. A passing reference need only be made 
to the beauty of some, and the repulsive appearance of 
others. Some species among these insect-folk live more 
or less an active aquatic life, others tenant the air, others 
again are ground-surface dwellers, and others pursue 
4 



INTRODUCTION 



their life buried beneath the soil. And there are others 
again which, being parasites, pass their existence within 
the body of another animal. Some are obnoxious pests 
to plant or other forms of life, many are of distinct 
service in the economy of Nature. Some are indis- 
pensable agents in the pollination and fertilisation of 
flowers, others are detestable disseminators of disease. 
There are those which perform useful work as scavengers 
and sanitary-inspectors, removers (and consumers !) of 
filth, there are others whose palate is best suited to sweet 
and tasty provender. There are represented among 
insects both soHtary and social workers. Those coming 
under the last-named head exhibit wonderful traits of 
co-partnership and co-operation, founding colonies whose 
laws and regulations are a striking testimony as to the 
intelligence these silent folk possess. Some perform 
their change from egg to perfect insect without much 
loss of time, others are well content to allow the operation 
to drag on almost indefinitely, until the hour when the 
all-important period of final emergence can be no longer 
delayed, and it is highly essential that the future destiny 
of the race shall be assured. Some, as has already been 
shown, are wingless, others possess the necessary organs 
of flight as soon as the adult state is reached, and there 
are others again who only enjoy the possession of flight- 
appendages for a short time, so as to enable them to 
travel from one place to another and there enjoy their 
little day. Some burrow, crawl, creep, fly, hop or jump, 
others swim with ease and facility, feathering their 

5 



BRITISH INSECTS 



" oars " in such a way as would make an Oxford or 
Cambridge freshman green with envy. Some love the 
muddy bottom of a sunlit pond, others revel in the 
thyme-covered slopes of a dry hillside. Some are fond 
of the warmth of the Ufe-giving sun, others, like Dio- 
genes of old, pass their time lurking in cold, dark places. 
The quick movements of some of these gay little crea- 
tures will, without much effort, be known to all, the 
laborious progression of others, and their consequent 
attendant devices for protection, will be equally famiUar 
to the veriest tyro. The abnormal number of eggs 
produced, so as to allow for waste, accident, loss through 
enemies and other causes, is not the least feature of 
interest, and the clever ruses that are adopted for hiding 
their productions in a suitable environment need only 
be mentioned in passing. This great world of insect- 
life which populates earth, air, and water, invading 
all the elements, inimical to the interests of human 
existence here, carrying out all unconsciously important 
missions there, is full of interest and wonder. If all 
that were born came to maturity, if the wonderful law 
of give-and-take, if the intricate and yet delicate balance 
of Nature was not properly adjusted, this very world 
of insect-life would, in a short time, make human life 
well-nigh, if not quite, impossible. Every green thing 
would soon disappear, all, all would be lost, and in a way 
the super-wonder of the whole fabric of this branch of 
Natural Science may be stated to be, not so much per- 
haps the fascinating life-stories that are unfolded, but 
6 



INTRODUCTION 



the marvellous provisions that have been made for 
keeping at bay those species whose misdeeds, unless 
thus checked, would spell disaster not only for our- 
selves, but for other earth-creatures who share with us 
all a common heritage in the wonder-world through 
which we are destined to pass and play no unimportant 
part. 

Of the remote ancestry of these insect-folk their fossil 
remains testify, and in the course of a most illuminating 
discourse on the age of insects. Professor G. H. Car- 
penter writes : — " We often take mountains as emblems 
of age, and speak of the * everlasting hills.' The most 
advanced orders of insects are older than the chalk of 
the southern English downs, while the early winged 
insects flitted by the shores of the lakes wherein the 
grits and sandstones of the Kerry Rocks gathered frag- 
ment by fragment. For the primitive wingless insects 
we must look at least to the time when by accumulation 
of coral, and the ash and lava of old volcanos, the rocks 
of Snowdon were being slowly formed on the bed of 
the Primary Sea, and the oldest rocks of the Western 
Highlands of Scotland will hardly carry us back to the 
primeval arthropods. We walk over the hills rousing 
the Bee from the flower, or the Dragon Fly from the 
rushes. The life of each individual insect lasts but for 
a few days, or months, or years. Yet these creatures 
are the latest links in a long chain of life which reaches 
back to a time before the mountain whereon they dwell 
was brought forth. To unobservant eyes the landscape 



BRITISH INSECTS 



seems enduring, but study of its features shows that it 
changes from age to age, changes even more rapidly 
than the insect-types which adorn it. Yet through the 
long periods of the earth's history the insects have been 
changing too ; and the form of their bodies, and the 
history of their growth, teach us how to trace in some 
degree the wondrous unfolding of their branch of the 
great tree of life." {Insects, their Structure and Life.) 

We may now proceed to consider the various species 
of insects included in each of the ten Orders already 
scheduled, concentrating chief attention upon those 
which are most likely to come under the reader's survey. 



ORDER I. AFTER A, OR SPRING-TAILS AND 

BRISTLE-TAILS 

Although, as has already been stated, there are som.e 
two hundred British species in the first order of insects 
with which we are here concerned, only the specialist is 
interested in the more intimate details connected with 
them, as, in the great world of insect-life, it is necessary 
to specialise in certain groups in order to work out the 
life-histories of the different species to any advantage. 
It need only be mentioned, therefore, that, as a rule, the 
Aptera are divided into two sub-orders, known as Col- 
8 



THE SPRING-TAILS 



lembola and Thysanura, the former containing the Spring- 
Tails, and the latter the Bristle-Tails. 
The Spring-Tails (Fig. i) are often discovered in 





Fig. 1, Spring-Tail. (Greatly Enlarged.) 



decaying vegetable matter, by the banks of ponds, on 
the surface of stagnant water, and on herbage by hedge- 

9 



BRITISH INSECTS 



row or wayside. They have small, soft bodies, and 
many of the species possess scales which, it is interesting 
to note, closely resemble those found upon the wings 
of butterflies. The species shown in the illustration is 
Papirius. There is at least one species, known by the 
scientific name oi Isotoma fimetaria, which is constructed 
in such a way that it can adapt itself so as to Uve on 
land, as well as on the surface of, and under, water. 
The popular name of Spring-Tail has been acquired 
by reason of the springing, or leaping, powers these 
creatures possess, the feat being carried out by means 
of a forked apparatus situate upon the under part of the 
body as shown in the lower specimen illustrated in 
Fig. I. Not all have this habit, or power, but those 
that do will doubtless attract attention when discovered. 
We are now employing insects to help in the work of 
the world, and Sewage Works are kept in order by the 
aid of one of these Spring-Tails, as it feeds on decaying 
matter which is, it is said, consumed at the rate of four 
pounds per week per individual insect. 

The sewage filters become choked with a jelly-hke 
matter, and large sums of money have been spent in 
clearing them, but now the Spring-Tail does the job for 
us, and incidentally saves the ratepayers. 

We are now learning that the best way of fighting 
insect pests is to set other insects to eat them. Indeed, 
if insects ceased destroying one another, they would 
multiply so rapidly that the world would soon become 
unfit for human habitation. 
10 



THE BRISTLE-TAILS 



But by employing insect labour we may eventually 
get the upper hand of all these devastating pests, and 
also be spared many unpleasant tasks. 




Fig. 2, Bristle-Tail. (Enlarged seven times.) 

The Thysamira, or Bristle-Tails, (Fig. 2) are apparently 
so-called because of the bristly appendages borne upon 

11 



BRITISH INSECTS 



the extremity of the body. The long, outward-spread 
antennae protruding from the head, and the double 
" tail " at the other end, together with the prominent 
segments of the body, go to make up a most interesting 
creature, though, truth to tell, it is seen to best advan- 
tage when examined under a lens, being by no means 
of large proportions as has already been hinted earlier 
on. These Bristle-Tails are split up into four famiHes, 
and although they differ a great deal in appearance and 
structure, we need not pursue the matter here, except 
to point out that in Campodea staphylinus (see Fig. 2, 
the species we had in mind when giving a general de- 
scription above), we meet with what is stated to be 
" perhaps the most primitive of all insects." It is of 
small size, being about a quarter of an inch in length, 
almost white in colour, and of very active disposition. 
It may be found in garden and other refuse. 

A representative of another family, namely, Japyx 
solifugus, more or less resembles the species just de- 
scribed, except that the " bristle-tail " is replaced with 
incurved forceps, or pincers, which strikingly remind 
one of those possessed by the more famihar Earwig. 
A member of another family of the Sub-Order Thysa- 
nura, is Lepisma saccharina, commonly known as the 
Fish Insect because it is covered with silvery-grey scales 
(Fig. 3). In spite of its fanciful association with aquatic 
life, the Fish Insect is a tenant of much drier situations 
than are affected by members of the finny tribe, as it 
resorts to warehouses, clothes presses, libraries, and 
12 



THE FISH-INSECT 



other " dry " places, and, on occasions, perpetrates a 




Fig. 3j Fish-Insect. (Enlarged six times.) 



13 



BRITISH INSECTS 



good deal of harm by gnawing the surface of old prints, 
books, and other papers. It is of larger size than the 
first species selected for mention (Campodea), having a 
broader, three-segmented thorax, much longer antennae, 
and, in addition to a pair of appendages on either side 
of the extremity of the abdomen, Lepisma has a centre 
piece to its " tail " which completes a trident, and also 
four smaller bristles towards the extremity, two placed 
on either side. 

We may conclude our brief reference to the members 
of this first Order of insects by drawing attention to an 
allied species which is really of an ornamental descrip- 
tion, being biscuit colour, attractively marked with 
black and grey scales. It measures about half an inch 
in length, and although of retiring habits it does some- 
times occur in very large numbers in warm places, such 
as a bakehouse. So much so, indeed, that, although 
to the scientist this creature is known as Thermophila 
furnorum, to those who are brought into contact with it 
in bakeries, it goes by the name of " Baker's Brat." 



ORDER II. MALLOPHAGA, OR BIRD AND 
BITING LICE 

The average individual will doubtless be somewhat 
alarmed to know that there are at least one hundred and 
14 



BIRD AND BITING LICE 



fifty species of these insects on the British Hst, but will 
heave a sigh of relief when told that, if cleanliness is 
established, he is not likely to be brought into too in- 
timate terms of acquaintance with any of them ! As 
with the Aptera, these wingless insects (Fig. 4) are of 




Fig. 4, Dog Louse. (Enlarged thirty-six times.) 



small proportions, having a flat, hairy body, with a large 
free head. The powerful mandibles with which the 
obnoxious little " beast " is armed, are situate in a 
cavity underneath the head, and the legs are attached 
to the sides of the body-segments. There may be one, 
or even two claws, on the extremity of the two-jointed 
legs. The species shown in Fig. 4 is Trichodectes latiis 
(Dog Louse). Fortunately for human beings the greater 

15 



BRITISH INSECTS 



number of these Lice devote their chief attention to 
birds, and it used to be a common supposition in Gilbert 
White's time that the possession of a supply of these 
parasites was helpful to such birds as Martins and Swal- 
lows, so that, when pressed for food during migration, 
these familiar harbingers of Summer would find an 
abundant food-supply close at hand. Dogs, sheep, 
and other mammals are also troubled with representa- 
tives of these distressing parasites, and a large number 
which we have examined under a microscope, secure 
from carrying out their distasteful practises, have caused 
intense interest by reason of their curious facial ex- 
pressions, to say nothing of their wonder of form and 
structure. 



ORDER III. ORTHOPTERA, OR EARWIGS, 
COCKROACHES, CRICKETS AND GRASS- 
HOPPERS 

The interesting series of insects included in the Order 
Ortlwptera are divided into several families, the members 
of which have distinguishing characteristics, such as 
three, four, or five-jointed legs ; legs formed for jump- 
ing, leaping, running, seizing, or walking, and long, or 
not very long, antennae. 
16 



THE COMMON EARWIG 



The Common Earwig {Forficida aurictilaria) represents 
the Family Forficulidce, and is one of five species found 
in Britain, another species, known as Labia minor, or 
Lesser Earwig, being much less noticeable than the 
more familiar insect known to everyone. The smaller 
species appears to resort to manure heaps. Three of 
the chief features connected with the Earwig — and here- 
after reference is only made to F. auricularia — are the 
quick power of movement, the possession of incurved 
appendages attached to the hind part of the body, and 
the manner in which — unlike the majority of insects — 
the young are cared for, the rule among the inhabitants 
of the insect-world being to produce a large number of 
eggs, and to leave their hatching and future welfare to 
chance, though provision is often, if not always made, 
with regard to a suitable environment in which the 
larvae may find themselves when hatched, and a good 
food-supply near at hand. Mother Earwig, as a matter 
of fact, is quite a model parent, and sets a remarkable 
example to others of the insect-race who, as has been 
stated, seem content with their efforts to perpetuate 
their species when once the eggs have been deposited. 
The female Earwig actually sits upon and helps to in- 
cubate her eggs, and when hatched the young closely 
resemble their parents. Her strong jaws at one end 
and formidable pincers at the other, are excellent weapons 
of defence should an enemy approach. The young 
soon require guidance and protection, and this the 
Mother Earwig patiently, if not lovingly, bestows. It 

17 



BRITISH INSECTS 



is one of the most interesting maternal instincts to wit- 
ness this solicitude of the Earwig for her young, espe- 
cially in this great world of insect-life where the inex- 
perienced person would least expect to find it. The 
Earwig, too, is notorious because of its supposed habit 
of creeping into the human ear, and the formidable use 
to which it is said to put its fearsome-looking forceps. 
Let it be said that this insect is far too particular as to 
its retreat to allow itself, unless by accident or unforseen 
circumstance, to enter one's ear, and the scorpion-like 
act of turning up its " tail," as if to strike or nip, is 
only carried out so as to enable the creature to fold away 
its small, delicate wings. Some species of Earwigs 
do not have wings, but our familiar garden tenant has 
these appendages, the front pair, as a rule, being modi- 
fied into elytra, or wing-cases, leathery in texture, and 
the softer hind pair being folded beneath, or just over- 
lapping, the former. The name Earwig should, as a 
matter of fact, be Earwing, and it was so-called in days 
gone by because of the resemblance of the shape of the 
wing to our own aural orifice. The small spherical 
eggs are semi-transparent, and of hard texture. Bein 
so small, they are rarely discovered, but they may be 
found in little groups buried beneath the ground or 
under a stone. Most Earwigs are brown, red, or yellow 
in colour, our own common species having, as is well 
known, a coat of mail of the former when in the adult 
state. During its transformation stage, it is first white, 
then perhaps piebald, as the stronger colour appears 
18 



or 



THE COMMON EARWIG 



and fuller development takes place, and finally choco- 
late-brown. When disturbed below ground in early 
Spring, the lighter-coloured, immature specimens may 
be seen. The forceps of the male are more fully de- 
veloped than in his mate, and he has nine segments, 
instead of seven, on the abdomen. That the Earwig 
is a garden enemy is undoubted, and in some years the 
large numbers that appear are such that a battle-royal 
must be waged against them. It is largely a vege- 
tarian, and has a habit of eating aw^ay the blossoms of 
our favourite flowers and other plant-parts, but it is 
Baid, on good authority, to be of some service in feeding 
upon the larva and pupa of insects, and thus helping 
to keep in check other obnoxious pests. The in- 
fallible habit of running to cover results in the easy 
capture of these garden tenants by placing an inverted 
flower-pot, hollow rod, bunch of hay or straw, or other 
trap of this kind near the plants visited, and dealing 
with the insects captured the succeeding morning, as 
they appear to carry out their chief depredations at 
dark, and may be trapped during the silence of the 
midnight-w^atch. They do not like paraffin, and we 
have known a ring of this oil, smeared on the ground all 
round a house, to effectually keep at bay a plague of 
these insects which previously had a habit of invading 
the homestead, and being found in hair brushes, beds, 
and other unlikely and unwelcome places. We pass 
by those very remarkable creatures popularly known 
as Stick-Insects (Family Phasmidce), but which can be 

19 



BRITISH INSECTS 



highly recommended as " pets," and the Mantids 
{Family Mantidce), and this brings us to the Cock- 
roaches, which constitute the Family Blatiidce. Some 
species of Cockroaches have \\ings, others are %^-ingless 
in both sexes. In others again, as in our own Common 
Cockroach {Blatta orie?italis, Fig. 5) only the male has 




flight appendages. The flat, dark, chocolate-coloured 
bodv and the long antennas of this so-called " Black 
Beetle" are well known. It resorts to houses (especially 
bakehouses and similar warm places), and comes from its 
hiding at night. Other kinds are found along the 
countr}-side far removed from habitations, but are much 
smaller in size. It need hardly be pointed out that, 
belonging to the OrtJioptera, they are not Beetles {Coleop- 
tera) and although some bear a strong resemblance 
to the latter, it is incorrect to classify, or refer to them 
as such. The female Cockroach has a capsule, or 
purse, on the extremity of her body, and in this recep- 
20 



THE COCKROACH 



tacle she carries her eggs, these being wonderfully 
arranged and protected. In at least one foreign species 
{Panesthia javanica), it is believed that the young are 
actually produced alive, and in another, the insect has 
the habit of rolling into a tight-fitting ball similar to the 
well-known Wood Louse. Young Cockroaches are at 
first whitish in colour, and, although resembling their 
parents, they do not come to maturity until, as with 
true larvse, they have cast their skins several times. 
This insect was originally introduced into Britain from 
Asia and the Levant, probably brought over on some 
homeward-bound vessel, and it has found the condi- 
tions admirably suited to its requirements. In the 
household the Cockroach is not a desirable inmate as, 
when it comes into contact with food — its diet is omni- 
vorous and nothing comes amiss to it — it taints it with a 
peculiar foetid odour. It will even devour leather, and 
whilst a great deal cannot be said in its favour, it is, 
perhaps, one of Nature's scavengers, and as a native of 
countries less sanitary than our own, it is likely that it 
fulfils no unimportant place where humans fail to act. 
It is said that, when the conditions become unsuitable, 
these creatures will all leave one house for another in 
a body. The Hedgehog is stated to be a good Cock- 
roach-catcher, but I have never put this to the test, not 
having as lodgers any of the insects with which to ex- 
periment. I best remember these unwelcome guests as 
tenanting my old home at St. Albans (one of the old 
coaching inns), as they do not seem to care for new 

21 



BRITISH INSECTS 



houses as for old. So far we have been concerned with 
members of the Order Orthoptera which move quickly 
by a crawling or running movement, but in the Family 
Gryllidce, or Crickets, we come to the first section of 
those which resort to hopping, jumping, or leaping. 
These insects have long, thin antenna;, or feelers, and 
two, or at most three-jointed, legs. Almost all the 
Crickets are dressed in a sober coat of brownish, or horn 
colour, and the majority of them resort to burrowing, 
or hiding under, or in, any favourable places. The 




Fiqr 6- 

^ MoU Cr^Lcke^r 

rarer Mole Cricket (Gryllotalpa, Fig. 6), has acquired 

its English Christian name because of its front pair of 

legs being used for the same purpose as those of the 
22 



THE HOUSE CRICKET 



better-known fur-clad mammal (the Mole), namely, for 
burrowing. This species is largely carnivorous. The 
curious clicking, or chirping, noise made by the familiar 
House Cricket (Gry litis domesticus) , is caused by the 
male rubbing one wing over the other in the same way 
as its cousin, the Grasshopper. It is said to be a signal 
to the female. When at rest, the wings are held in a 
horizontal position, and protrude beyond the body in 
the male. On the end of the female's body there is 
an ovipositor, with which a hole is drilled, and then an 
egg is laid. This happens about midsummer, and 
as many as 200 to 300 eggs are deposited by one female. 
The succeeding Winter is passed in the larval state, 
the adult form not being attained until the first year's 
birthday. Where there are fires in old buildings and 
other places the House Cricket delights to dwell, and 
the manner in which it contrives to get behind walls, 
skirting, and similar retreats is remarkable to notice. 
New houses are not exempt from its presence, and 
whilst its curious love-song does not recommend itself 
to some listeners, by others it is regarded with even 
veneration, and evidently Leigh Hunt was impressed 
with it, for in his lines to " The Grasshopper and The 
Cricket," he writes : — 
** O sweet and tiny cousins that belong, 

One to the fields, the other to the hearth, 
Both have your sunshine ; both though small are strong, 
To sing in thoughtful ears this natural song — 

Indoors and out, Summer and Winter, mirth." 

23 



BRITISH INSECTS 



The House Cricket (Fig. 7) revels in heat, and it is 
wonderful what a high temperature it can stand, but we 
are told, and not without surprise, that it often gets 
thirsty, and must have somewhere at hand where it 
can drink. Damp wool seems to be a favourite diet 




'3 7- 



MoLLSi Crickcr 



of this species, but there must surely be other ingre- 
dients upon which it feeds of which we are not cognisant 
Clothes, placed to air or dry by the fire overnight, or in 
an airing cupboard, have been found to be riddled by 
these household inmates, reminding one of the ravages of 
the larva of the Clothes Moth, of whose unkind attention 
my expensive boxcloth gaiters bear ample evidence at the 
present time. The Cricket is attracted by light, if the 
latter is extinguished in the room, and an electric torch 
is held at its entrance hole. In Summer one can often 
hear Crickets out-of-doors. These need not neces- 
sarily be Field Crickets, as the House Cricket will forsake 
its indoor retreat in Summer, and take a lengthy airing 
24 



FIELD CRICKET AND GRASSHOPPERS 

outside. Some old folks say it is lucky to have these 
insects on the premises, and one writer has given his 
testimony thus : " Personally, I like the music (of the 
Cricket), and spare the annoyance of having my socks 
made into mince meat by keeping them out of Mr. 
Cricket's way." 

The Field Cricket (Gryllus campestris) is larger and 
darker than its household cousin, and remains under- 
ground by day, stealing forth at night to secure its food. 
The male is most persistent in his efforts to call, or 
soothe, his mate, and will remain at the entrance to his 
burrow love-calling for hours on end. The larva 
closely resembles the imago minus wings, and lives in a 
burrow of its own making. 

The Grasshoppers are classed under two distinct 
Families, those known as the Long-Horned being in- 
cluded in the Phasgonuridce, and the Short-Horned are 
relegated to the Family Locustidce, which also embraces 
the Locusts. The former are distinguished from the 
Crickets by having four-jointed legs, and the presence 
of soft pads to assist them to obtain a foothold upon 
the leaves and stems of plants. They have — as the 
Long-Horned name implies — very long antennae made 
up of a large number of joints (see coloured frontis- 
piece), and as many as 480 joints have been counted on 
the antennas of one individual. These larger, long- 
horned species resort to bushes, shrubs, and trees, and 
whilst some feed upon leaves, others are carnivorous. 
The stridulating noise — cleverly likened by a boy 

25 



BRITISH INSECTS 



acquaintance of mine to a Fairy's sewing machine — is pro- 
duced in the same way as that of the Cricket, the drum 
being situate at the base of the right wing, and the file, 
or bow, on the left one. Whilst the male only is capable 
of producing this familiar country sound in the majority 
of winged species, there are allied insects in which both 
sexes are equally favoured in this respect. 

The Great Green Grasshopper {Phasgonura viridis- 
sima) is our largest British species, and resorts to bushes, 
grassy lanes, and hedgerows. It appears in August and 
September. I have found it very plentiful in Devon 
and Cornwall, Miss Meyer's coloured illustration will 
convey a much better idea than a lengthy description of 
this beautiful insect. It is at least two to three inches in 
length, has very long hind legs, with a knob-like joint 
at the knee, and large eyes. It is worthy of close scrutiny 
under a powerful glass. 

The cheery little tenant of our grassy commons and 
waysides, the Common Grasshopper {Stenohothrus bi- 
color) fitly represents the Short-Horned species of the 
Family Locustidcs. As already indicated, this family 
includes the Locusts, but the visits of the latter to this 
country are so infrequent that the bare mention of their 
name must suffice. The Short-Horned Grasshoppers 
have, as their name implies, much shorter antennae 
than their larger cousins, and they have three, instead 
of four-jointed legs. Some species are almost, if not 
quite, wingless, and whilst the hearing organs of Crickets, 
Grasshoppers, and Locusts are very perfect, and the 
26 



THE COMMON GRASSHOPPER 

ears of PhasgonuridcB are situate upon the front pair of 
legs, those of the Locustidce are placed on each side of 
the base of the abdomen. The happy-go-lucky life 
passed by this cheerful little tenant of the countryside 
will be known to all those who revel in the joys of the 
outdoor world. As a general rule, it appears to be a 
vegetarian, but its numbers do not ever attain the pro- 
portions of its cousin, the Locust, and it does not per- 
petrate any appreciable damage. It appears to vary in 
colour, brown, green, red, yellow, and other varieties 
being forthcoming. The long, narrow, and elliptical 
eggs are deposited in batches in the ground, a hole being 
made by the short, stout ovipositor at the extremity of 
the female's body. It is much shorter and less pro- 
minent than that of the Long-Horned Grasshopper, 
which is a very conspicuous appendage. The eggs are 
covered over with a sticky secretion, which hardens and 
affords them protection. The eggs remain as such 
until early Spring, and when the larva appears it passes 
through successive moults until it is eventually ready 
to take up its appointed place in the great world of life. 



27 



BRITISH INSECTS 



ORDER IV. RHYNCHOTA, OR BUGS, FROTH- 
FLIES, APHIDS, AND SCALE-INSECTS 

This unpopular order of insects — many, if not most, 
of the species included therein being pests of mankind — 
is divided into two Sub-Orders in which the Bugs (in- 
cluding the Water Boatman and Water Scorpion), find 
a place among the Heniiptera, and the Frog Hopper 
(or Froth Fly), Green Fly, Apple Sucker, and Scale 
Insects constitute the Hoirioptera. All these creatures 
have an incomplete metamorphosis, the mouth part 
is formed into a long proboscis for piercing or sucking 
(hence name of Order from RJiyncos=a. beak), and, 
when not in use, it is hidden beneath the body, and is 
directed backwards. In the Hemiptera the base of the 
front wings is of leather}^ texture, and the wings are 
held crossed when at rest. For the most part these 
creatures are vegetarians, as they live by sucking juices 
from plants ; others, however, do not restrict their 
attention to plants, but attack and obtain blood from 
various animals, including man. Fortunately, the worst 
offenders are found in other countries than our own. 
We may now consider a few t\'pical representatives of 
the Hemiptera, and for this purpose we may first dispose 
of the Land Bugs, as we may call them, and then devote 

attention to two famiUar aquatic species. 
28 



SHIELD AND OTHER BUGS 



The Shield Bugs arc so-called because they have a 
shield, or plate, covering the wings, and our British 
species are of small size. Then there are their cousins, 
the Pentagonal Shield Bugs, which have been thus 
named because the wing-shield does not wholly cover 
the flight-appendages, and is so placed that it forms a 
triangle, which is sometimes incomplete at the sides, 
so that it forms a five-sided plate situate above the bases 
of the wings. These Bugs haunt plants of various 
kinds for the purpose of extracting the juices, but they 
also feed upon soft-bodied insects. In colour they 
are brown or green, and measure about half an inch 
long. Other species are much smaller and narrower. 
Others again, possess almost transparent wings (such as 
the Lace-Winged Bug), and whilst all are enemies of 
plants, the worst offender as regards human beings is 
the Bed Bug {Cimex lectularius). It is reddish-brown 
in colour, flattish in form, and emits a most offensive 
odour, in addition to forcing its distasteful presence 
upon a household or, worse still, upon one's person. 
As with the Crickets, there seems some doubt as to the 
original home of this insect, but it is thought to have 
come from Africa. One rather wishes that it had 
stayed there I Cleanliness is essential to combat the 
attention of this detestable household pest, but even 
this is not always successful as I have known more than 
one house, the tenants of which were scrupulously 
clean, to be troubled with them. Incidentally, it may 
be stated that the Cockroach is an enemy of the Bug 
D 29 



BRITISH INSECTS 



so that, if both kinds of insects are found taking lodgings 
in a household, the owner must decide for himself which, 
if either, of the two he will decide to harbour. We 
would not, in any case, advise the introduction of the 
Cockroach to combat the Bug. In addition to Cimex 
lectularius, there are three others of the same genus 
which seem to restrict attention to Bats, Pigeons, and 
Swallows, and have, in consequence, been accorded 
the specific names of C. piptstrellt, C. colombarius, and 
C hirundinis, respectively. There is one more species 
which deserves mention, that is the Masked Bug which 
somewhat resembles the Water Scorpion described later 
on. It measures almost an inch in length, and has 
black wings. The larva and adult both prey upon other 
insects (including the Bed Bug), and presumably the 
popular name has been acquired because the larva has 
the habit of camouflaging its body with some substance, 
so as to stalk its prey unobserved. The long-legged 
Water Measurers (Hydromeira), and also the Pond 
Skaters {Gerrida), are close relatives of the Land Bugs. 
They will be known by sight to almost everyone who 
visits a pond or stream, and their movements (the Mea- 
surer's slow, the Skater's quick) rarely fail to excite 
interest. This introduces us to two further pond- 
dwellers in the persons of the Water Boatman and Water 
Scorpion. The first-named insect {Notonecta glauca) (Fig. 
8), has a smooth, flattish, yellowish-brown body about 
half an inch long, but its chief appeal to the popular 
mind is its habit of floating upside down, and propelHng 
30 



THE WATER BOATMAN 



itself by its long, hairy hind legs. Its resemblance to 
a miniature boat is very remarkable. It is at once 
sluggish and active, that is, it exerts itself strenuously 
when it wishes to move, or change its position, but 
soon afterwards takes up a " mark-time " attitude as 
if its efforts were too much for it, and it required a rest 
from its labours. It is a capital tenant for an aquarium, 
and like its relative next claiming attention, rarely fails 
to excite interest, especially among those (and they 
are legion) who have little, or no, knowledge of the 




fig 8 

WcLte-r- Boatrncirv. 

wonderful variety of life in the nearest pond or stream. 
The Water Boatman is a rapid flier, and whilst the 
outer pair of wings resemble those of the Coleoptera 
(or Beetles), serving for protection rather than loco- 
motion, the delicate inner wings are objects of great 
beauty. It has a powerful beak capable of inflicting 
a nasty puncture. Small wonder, therefore, that it 
often preys upon larger creatures than itself, and having 
once secured a meal, shows considerable reluctance to 
" let go." The eggs are laid singly on various kinds of 
water-plants, each egg being deposited in a hole made 

31 



BRITISH INSECTS 



by the female's ovipositor. The larva is very similar 
to the adult, excepting for the absence of wings, but 
in the pupal state rudimentary wings are present. 
The Water Scorpion {Nepa cinerea, Figs. 9 and go), 








riq 9CU Larva oF 



is first-cousin of the last-mentioned species, and it has 
acquired its popular (or unpopular !) name because the 
front pair of legs bear a resemblance to the forceps of 
the true Scorpion. This famihar aquatic insect is dull 
brown in colour, marked with some red. It has a broad, 
flat, bug-like body, which measures about an inch in 
length, and about half as much across. It inhabits 
both clear-running streams as well as ponds, and per- 
haps the most conspicuous feature is the apparatus by 
which the creature takes in free air. This double tube 
is attached to the abdomen, and when this water-dweller 
requires a fresh supply of air, it rises to the surface and 
protrudes its " tail." This accomplished, it dives below 
32 



THE WATER SCORPION 



again to renew its operations. When secreted upon 
the bed of its environment, or among aquatic plants, it 
is difficult to detect, and as it is not of very active habits, 
it secures protection in this way. As a matter of fact, 
it is not a tempting morsel for other creatures to prey 
upon, and seems mostly immune from attack. But its 
protective resemblance does enable the Water Scorpion 
to lie in wait for its own prey, and this, together with 
the power of the front pair of legs, serve it to great 
advantage. Having secured its victim, the short sharp 
beak soon gets to work on the former's body. The 
clawed forelegs are beautifully fashioned, so as to be 
closed like a pocket-knife when not in use. When the 
membranous under- wings are fully extended, the insect 
is more presentable, and is likely to make a stronger 
appeal, as there is not only a bright red streak across 
part of the wings, but the upper surface of the abdomen 
is also edged with the same colour. It hibernates in 
Winter, and can, if needs be, remain under water for a 
great length of time without approaching the surface. 
The oval-shaped eggs are deposited in a string, and the 
larva closely resembles the mature insect. The longer 
and more slender breathing tube of the adult is replaced 
with a much shorter and thicker apparatus in the im- 
mature form. 

We now come to smaller fry included in the Sub- 
Order Homoptera, members of which possess wings 
having the same texture throughout, and these (where 
they do occur) are held roof-hke when the insect is at 

33 



BRITISH INSECTS 



rest. There are several families of Humoptera which 
are unrepresented in Britain— such as the Cicadas 
(notorious for the sounds that they are capable of pro- 
ducing), the Lantern Flies {Fulgoridce), which in some 
species have curiously developed heads, and, in addition, 
secrete wax which is used by the Chinese for making 
candles. This brings us to the Cercopidce, or Froth 
Flies, the commonest and best known being the so- 
called Cuckoo Spit, or Frog Hopper {Philcemis spumarius). 
The blobs of froth which may be seen attached to garden 
and wild plants in early Summer will be well known, 
but few people seem aware that the soft green larva of 
the Frog Hopper is responsible for this, and that the 
little tenant of the froth may easily be found by searching. 
This substance is an obvious protection for this familiar 
country dweller, until such time that its development 
enables it to dispense with the frothy covering. By 
this time, it has become a hard, dark-coloured, jumpy 
little beast, capable of prodigious hops for so small a 
creature. If man could, in comparison with his size, 
cover similar ground, the speed at which we live would 
be even more pronounced than it is to-day. When 
hidden in the froth apparently little harm is perpetrated. 
It is just a question of " wait and see " as, when mature, 
the Frog Hopper is a great lover of the juice of plants, 
and is constantly puncturing young leaves in order to 
extract the juice. This causes the leaves to wither 
and decay. Of the amazing Aphides or Green-Fly, 
much might be written. Green-Fly is rather a mis- 
34 



APHIDES, OR GREEN FLY 



nomer, as there is a sooty-coloured pest belonging to 
this family which affects beans, and another species is 
a great enemy of hops. Roses, apple-trees, and other 
garden produce are preyed upon by these hosts of small 
plant-lice who, by sheer force of numbers and power 
of multiplication, are difficult to deal with successfully. 
Certain kinds of birds — and also, be it noted, the larva 
of the Ladybird Beetle — perform useful work in re- 
ducing the plagues that infest our gardens, but spraying 
and hand-picking are alike necessary. Even then, it is 
difficult to cope with the pests, as their method of pro- 
pagation is such that, in double-quick time, another 
host soon appears, and one's work seems never done 
when the invading Aphides are at their height. Of 
the species which affect agriculture, horticulture, and 
forestry mention may be made by name only of the 
Apple, Bean, Cabbage, Carrot, Cherry, Currant, Goose- 
berry, Hop, Larch, Peach, Plum, Raspberry, Rose, 
Rosy Apple, Turnip, and Woolly Aphides. The variety 
of plants attacked is indicated by the popular name. 
Spraying with extract of quassia may be recommended 
(see " Pests of the Garden and Orchard, Farm and 
Forest," by Ray Palmer, F.E.S., and the Author), and 
it is very evident that, to be successful in the cultivation 
of plants, it is essential to have an intimate knowledge of 
one's friends and foes, and the best method to employ 
in dealing with those inimical to the interests of man- 
kind. I venture to recommend the work above re- 
ferred to in this respect. Perhaps the detestable Woolly 

35 



BRITISH INSECTS 



Aphis {Schizoneura lanigera) is one of the worst enemies 
of all. It is incorrectly called American Blight as it is 
of European origin. It is a great enemy of apple trees 
all over the world, and is soon recognised by the soft 
white mildew-like substance which covers both the 
adult females and young. The wingless females are 
purplish-brown in colour, and these are constantly 
giving birth to living young, and the latter, in due course, 
commence to perform a like operation. The eggs are 
deposited by wingless oviparous females, and these 
hatch the succeeding Spring, but adult insects also 
hibernate in cracks, crevices, and elsewhere. The whole 
story cannot here be told, though it is as fascinating in 
interest as a fairy tale, but has a much less pleasant 
ending. As the Woolly Aphis attacks the roots, as 
well as the parts above ground, remedies must be appHed 
for combating both sets of enemies. The best method 
is to paint the patches on the branches with methylated 
spirit, and below ground it is essential that carbon bi- 
sulphide should be injected into the soil around the 
roots in Winter. Grease banding — as carried out for 
the destructive Winter Moth — is also a preventive, and 
can be recommended. Another serious pest belonging 
to the same Sub Order Homoptera is the Apple Sucker 
{Psylla mail). It attacks buds, blossoms, and leaves 
of apples, and the eggs may be found in Winter and 
early Spring on the twigs, especially around the buds. 
They are pale yellow, and curiously shaped. Larval 
and nymphal stages are passed through, and eventually 
36 



SCALE INSECTS 



the adult appears. It is unfortunate that such a good- 
looking insect should be so destructive in its larval state, 
as its greenish colour and transparent wings are of an 
attractive description. Spraying with a nicotine soap- 
wash, paraffin emulsion, etc., is recommended, but it 
would be wise to consult the work on " Pests " already 
referred to, as it is outside the scope of this popular 
treatise to do more than draw the reader's attention to 
the matter. The Coccidce, or Scale Insects, next call 
for notice by way of concluding our studies of the Order 
Rhynchota. These have acquired their name from the 
scale-like appearance of the females of many of the 
species. The males are delicate looking creatures, and 
only possess one pair of wings. These Scale-Insects 
attack such plants as apple, apricot, ash, beech, currant, 
elm, gooseberry, peach, pear, plum, vine, and willow. 
One species is so-called because it resembles a mussel, 
another is somewhat like a small oyster-shell. Spray- 
ing with a caustic alkali wash is an effective remedy. 
It is only within recent years that close study has been 
made of these and other enemies of the husbandman, 
and any young naturalist, desirous of aiding the food- 
production of his country, would do well to specialise 
in some branch of pest-study, so as to help complete 
the full life-histories of these minute creatures, and 
others might equally well concentrate their efforts upon 
the best remedies that can be employed for dealing 
with them. 



37 



BRITISH INSECTS 



ORDER V. COLEOPTERA, OR BEETLES 

The very large number of species included in this 
important Order of Insects, the largest British Order 
we have after the Hymenoptera and Diptera, has already 
been alluded to, but it is necessary to emphasise it again 
here as the possibility of dealing with more than a few 
representatives of the principal families cannot be enter- 
tained. The Sheath-Winged Insects, or Beetles, undergo 
a complete metamorphosis. The front pair of wings 
are called elytra, and these serve the purpose of pro- 
tecting the hind ones, and are not of use for flight. 
The flight appendages are folded beneath the elytra, 
and, when at rest, they meet in a straight Hne along the 
back, and do not cross one another. It is by reason of 
the elytra hiding the soft hind wings that surprise is so 
often expressed by the unobservant as to the possession 
of " wings " by even the more familiar kinds of Beetles. 
The Coleoptera are, as a rule, divided into twelve Sub- 
Orders, each of course with certain characters by which 
they are classified. These need not detain us here as 
the chief points of interest are pointed out as we proceed. 

The Green Tiger Beetle {Cicindella campestris) , is the 
first to occupy pride of place as representing the 
CicindelidcE^ which are active, predaceous beetles whose 
larvae make perpendicular shafts in dry soil, and lie 
38 



VIOLET GROUND AND BOMBARDIER BEETLES 

in ambush for their prey. The species under review is 
fond of sandy, or gravelly, soil, and revels in hot sun- 
shine. It is adorned with a bright green dress, spotted 
with yellow. Both as a larva and imago it partakes of 
an insectivorous diet, and may be regarded as a friend 
of the gardener. Of the larger number of Carnivorous 
Ground Beetles. Family Carabidce, whose clean bodies 
are so often commented upon when one suddenly dis- 
turbs a specimen from beneath the soil, we may select 
the Violet Ground Beetle [Carahus violaceous, see Frontis- 
piece), and the Bombardier {Brachinus crepitans). These, 
too, are of predaceous habits, the majority feeding at 
dark, and hiding under stones, logs, and elsewhere by 
day. It is always a good idea when in the country to 
turn over stones, logs, fallen tree-stumps, old sacks, and 
other debris so as to ascertain if any creatures are in 
hiding underneath. The searcher is more often than 
not rewarded. The Violet Ground Beetle should not 
be killed as, being carnivorous, it does good in feeding 
upon soft-bodied insects and grubs contained in the 
soil. The popular name of " Slug Killer " given by 
gardeners to the larva of C. violaceous is sufficient testi- 
mony of its usefulness. The adult is, as its name im- 
plies, dark violet-blue, and as proving that there are 
exceptions to every rule, this species has its elytra fastened 
together, and the under wings are not developed. There- 
fore it cannot fly. 

The Bombardier Beetle {Brachinus crepitans), is chiefly 
notorious because it has the habit of discharging from 

39 



BRITISH INSECTS 



the extremity of its body a volatile fluid which vaporises 
with a slight explosion when coming into contact with 
the air. When being pursued by an enemy, and the 
Bombardier fires a " shot," the effect on the former 
can be better imagined than described. If the first 
" shot " fails, quite a little cannonade is kept up until 
the ammunition gives out. 

The Devil's Coach-Horse, or Cocktail Beetle [Ocypus 




iq" 10. 
Devil's CoacK Hor-se.. 

olens, Fig. lo), is a familiar tenant of the garden, and its 
mourning attire, and threatening attitude as it turns 
up its head and " tail," are well known. It has quick 
powers of movement, is about an inch in length, and 
has very short wing-cases. It produces the largest 
egg of any British insect. It is a useful species, the 
larva and adult feeding upon slugs and the larvae of other 
insects. It is called by the specific name of olens = 
stinking, because of the odour it gives off. 

The ceaseless gyrations of the Whirligig Beetle {Gyri- 
nus natator) as, joined by numerous companions, it 
rushes round and round the surface of pond or stream, 
is another common water-dweller. As it pursues its 
40 



GREAT BROWN WATER BEETLE 

evolutions, it seems to have solved the problem of per- 
petual motion, and as the sun lights up the body-covering, 
the little round fellows remind one of globules of quick- 
silver, and as equally elusive I It belongs to the Family 
Gyrintdce, the larvae living below the surface, but the 
adults, as indicated, are surface-skimmers, rushing here, 
there, and everywhere by means of their paddle-shaped 
middle and hind legs. The front pair are used for 
seizing and holding prey. 

We again make the acquaintance of further predaceous 
insects among the Dytiscidce, the representative selected 
for this family being Dytisciis marginalis, or Great Brown 
Water Beetle, (Figs, ii, 12 and 13). This fine insect 
is a terror of the pond or stream in which it dwells, 
both in the larval and adult states. It is one of the 
" sharks " of insect-Hfe, and woe betide any creature 
which it is able to tackle successfully. Once it secures 
a hold, there is no leaving go. The tapered larva is 
prominently segmented, and bears a pair of strong 
jaws, and breathing tubes at the opposite extremity. 
It may be mistaken for the larva of the Dragon Fly by 
the inexperienced. The pupa is thicker, and bears 
more evidence of the creature that-is-to-be, and the 
imago is dark olive-brown, with large wing-cases, and 
strong jaws. This beetle is free of all the elements, as 
it can crawl, fly, and swim, and will, on occasions, leave 
one sheet of water for another. It is a fine diver and 
swimmer, the hind pair of Hmbs being flat-like, and 
fringed with hairs, specially adapted for the purpose 

41 



BRITISH INSECTS 



for which they are required. It measures about i| 
inches in length, and about | an inch across. It has 
two sharp spines near the hind legs which are of obvious 



Fig. 11. 



Fig. 12. 




Fig. 13. 

Fig. 11, Larva. Fig. 12, Pupa. Fig. 13, Image of Great 
Brown Water Beetle. 



service for defence, and also discharges an evil-smelling 
fluid when irritated. When the larva is ready to pupate, 
42 



GREAT BLACK WATER & ROVE BEETLES 

it leaves the water-margin, and excavates a small oval- 
shaped cell in which to remain concealed. Under 
normal conditions it doesn't take long for the perfect 
beetle to emerge, but there are times when it remains 
in the pupal state throughout the Winter. The adult 
extrudes its hind quarters above the surface of the water 
so as to take in a fresh supply of air bubbles. 

The Great Black Water Beetle {Hydrous piceus), must 
not be confused with the last-mentioned, as, in the 
adult state, H. piceus appears to be a vegetarian. It is 
the largest member of the Coleoptera in Britain, with 
the sole exception of the handsome Stag Beetle. The 
female deposits a number of eggs in an oval cocoon 
which she cleverly attaches to an aquatic plant. The 
larva feeds upon animal food until such time that, for 
some reason, it decides to become a vegetarian ! This 
species is harmless in an aquarium and may much more 
safely be recommended than Dytiscus tnarginalis. It 
belongs to the Family Hydrophilidce. The Staphyltntda, 
or Rove Beetles, are next in order of merit as regards 
the family tree, but must be summarily dismissed with 
the statement that they include a very large assembly 
of small species which, although good fliers, fold their 
wings into a very small space, and have very short wing- 
covers. Those with which the reader is most likely to 
come into contact are the annoying little insects which 
have such an obnoxious habit of getting into one's eye, 
and causing painful irritation until removed. These 
unwelcome visitors are all popularly dubbed " Flies " 

43 



BRITISH INSECTS 



by the unfortunate recipient. Carrion-feeding beetles 
next engage attention, and these belong to the Silphida, 
which includes Necrophorus vespillo, or the Burying 
Beetle (Fig. 14). This species, and its kindred, have the 







curious habit of burying dead birds, mice, shrews, voles, 
and other animals by digging the earth away beneath 
them. This accompHshed, the beetle deposits her 
eggs upon the dead carcase, and when the larvae, or 
grubs, hatch they find an abundant food-supply near at 
hand. These insect-scavengers perform useful work, 
and it is largely owing to their efforts that so few dead 
bodies of wild creatures are discovered. These Carrion 
Beetles also devour some of the decomposing flesh of the 
carcase, and seem to relish the bad odour that is given 
off. They may be known by the possession of a knob 
at the tip of the antenna. The Burying Beetle is rarely 
seen, unless close watch is kept over a dead rodent, 
bird, or other animal, and they seem to fly about on their 
44 



LADYBIRD BEETLES 



scavenging expeditions in pairs, being attracted to the 
spot by scent. The commonest species is brownish- 
black, with bands and spots of orange-yellow. 

The Coccinellidce includes the useful Ladybird Beetles, 
and these are popularly named according to the number 
of spots which they bear upon the wing-cases. The 
usual form is quite familiar, as the Ladybird is almost as 
highly regarded in the world of insect life as the Robin 
is among birds. Yet it is distressing to notice how 
this beneficent insect is destroyed when in the larval 
state by even experienced gardeners, to some of whom 
all animal life spells " foe " ! During a large invasion 
of these beetles on the South Devon Coast a year or 
two ago, I also witnessed a small child just able to toddle 
busily occupied crushing dozens of these creatures by 
way of amusement. The larva may frequently be dis- 
covered among plant-lice on the under surface of curled 
apple leaves. It is smoke-grey in colour, with yellow 
or white dots, and is very slow-moving. It does good 
by feeding upon the lice, and should at all times be 
encouraged. The rounded convex form, short legs 
and antennae, black and red, or black and yellow elytra, 
and the number of the spots, are features of interest. 
Two of the most familiar species are known as the 
Two-Spot and Seven-Spot respectively, but there is 
another called the Eyed Ladybird, having eight black 
spots, which perform useful service in clearing off green 
fly from hop plants. The creamy-white eggs of Lady- 
birds are deposited on plants during Spring, and the 
« 46 



BRITISH INSECTS 



black and creamy-white pupa is short and stumpy. 
The only defence this insect has is by ejecting an orange- 
coloured fluid of an acrid nature. It feigns death in a 
very clever v^ay, but takes to wing when it considers 
the coast is clear. 

The Raspberry Beetle {Byturus tomentosus) is a very 
destructive insect belonging to the family Byturidce. 
The larva eats the tasty berries, but the adult devotes 
attention to the buds and blossoms. The brown under- 
coat is more or less concealed by yellowish-grey down. 
The yellowish larva has a brown head, and is about 
half an inch in length. Eggs are laid in raspberry 
blossoms, and doubtless the reader has encountered 
the larva when eating some of the luscious fruit. When 
full-fed, a cocoon is made in a crack of the cane, or 
elsewhere, and the beetle does not emerge until the 
succeeding April or May. 

What are called the Lamellicorns include not only 
many large and striking insects, but a number of them 
are to be regarded as pests to crops and trees. We may 
here include the Cockchafer, three of its cousins, and 
the Dor Beetle, of the Family Scarahceidce. 

The Cockchafer {Melolontha vulgaris, Fig. 15), feeds 
upon the leaves of elm, oak, and other trees, but it is 
the fat larva which does most damage, as it devotes 
attention to roots of cultivated crops, and passes three 
years beneath the soil before completing its develop- 
ment The adult beetle has a black head and abdomen, 
with reddish-brown elytra, and fan-shaped antennae, the 
46 



THE CHAFER BEETLES 



latter worthy of examination under a lens. The creamy- 
white eggs are deposited in batches in the ground, and 
the soft fleshy grubs are greyish- white, with hard brown 
heads, and long legs. When brought above ground, 
the grub is inactive, and curls its body inwards. It is 




fiq IT 






the Summer Chafer {Rhizotrogus solstitialis), a smaller 
species than the foregoing, that occurs more or less 
regularly every season, as its life cycle only takes a year 
to complete. It is mostly on the wing in July. 

The Garden Chafer {Phyllopertha horticola), is a day- 
flier, and often in large numbers. It is the smallest 
of the four, and is green and reddish-brown in colour. 
The larva does harm to grass land, and the adults pay 
attention to the foliage of beans, peas, roses, turnips, 
etc. 

The pretty Rose Chafer {Cetonia aurata), is bright 
green, marked with white on the wing-cases. It flies 
during May and June on bright days, and unfortunately 
does damage to the flowers and foliage of raspberries, 

47 



BRITISH INSECTS 



roses, strawberries, and turnips. The larvje live in 
the ground for two or three years, and are similar to 
those of M. vulgaris. 

Many species of Scarahceidce, like the one which 
follows, are dung-feeders, but the most famous is the 
so-called Sacred Scarab of the Egyptian desert about 
which Henri Fabre has written so arrestingly. This, 
and others of its kin, roll excrement into round balls 
with the hind legs until a suitable spot is reached where 
the curious meal can be partaken of at leisure. 

The Dor Beetle {Geotrupes stercorarius Fig. 16), is 



"* ^M 




t'q ife Dot- I^>^t> ri? 



the all-black fellov^ with droning flight met with of a 
Summer evening when twilight shadows fall. It whizzes 
past on unerring wings, singing cheerfully as it pursues 
its airy course. On the underside of the body the 
adult is steel-blue, with a green or purple gloss. The 
eggs are laid in manure heaps, and in this warm retreat 
the larva passes the Winter. The latter is not a harmful 
creature, and acts as one of the sanitary agents of Nature. 
The handsome Stag Beetle {Lucanus cervtis, Fig. 17), 
48 



THE STAG BEETLE 



fitly represents the family Lucanidce, the males of which 
have such a large head and jaws that they have been 
likened to the antlers of the monarch of the glen, and 
perpetuated in the common English name. Most 
species feed during the larval state on rotten wood. 
The shining chocolate-black armour of the Stag Beetle 




J'/ 5 lag- Bee tie 



sets off to advantage this large, fine creature, and whilst 
the antlered male is the larger of the sexes, the female 
has more powerful jaws than her husband. I have 
known the female to be picked up by the male and 
carried away triumphant, after the latter had fought for 

49 



BRITISH INSECTS 



possession with a rival. This insect presents an engaging 
sight when seen flying, and often ascends to a consider- 
able height. The small antlers of the female enable 
her to pierce a hole in a tree-trunk, and in this she de- 
posits her egg. The resultant grub feeds upon the wood 
but, when full-fed, crawls to the ground, and pupates 
in a cocoon. It appears to emerge in late Autumn, 
but is not ready to become a free-agent until the next 
Summer. The adult lives on the juices of plants, being 
provided with a brush-like organ admirably suited for 
this purpose. 

The Anohiidce includes a number of species which 
are very destructive to dry timber, woodwork, and 
furniture, this being the work of the larva as it 
tunnels and eats its way along. Valuable furniture 
may be utterly ruined in this way by the larva of the 
well-known Death- Watch Beetle {Xestohium riifovillo- 
sum), and four-post bedsteads, bookcases, and other 
articles specially suffer. One of my own walnut book- 
cases was reduced almost to matchwood by the incursions 
of these larvae, and at the time of writing very large 
cavities have been made by them in the roof of the his- 
toric Westminster Hall, which has made it quite unsafe, 
and needing immediate attention. The curious ticking 
noise which has given rise to so many superstitions and 
beliefs, is caused by the beetle striking the jaws in regular 
motion against resounding wood. When wainscoting 
was more used than to-day, the " supernatural " sound 
often came from its vicinity, this being a favourite re- 
50 



DEATH-WATCH & GLOW-WORM BEETLES 

treat for this interesting, but destructive, creature. 
The noise is said to be made as a signal to attract each 
other. It is a brown-coloured species, and one can 
hardly credit that so small a creature is capable of per- 
petrating such damage. Other species also attack fur- 
niture and similar articles, and still another is a mark 
on books, boots, and leather goods, if these have not 
been used for any length of time and the larvae allowed 
to carry out their depredations undisturbed. 

The Glow-Worm Beetle {Lampyris noctilnca Fig. i8). 




comes next, and belongs, like the Fire-Flies, to the 
Lampyridt£. The males always have wings, but the 
females are very unlike their mates, being grub-like. 
Even the eggs are luminous, and, as is well known, 
the adults are expert " lamplighters." Sometimes a 
walk of a warm Summer's evening is reminiscent of 
fairyland, so prettily is the herbage lit up with the soft 
green lights of this species. Nearly all of them are 
useful, as the prey mostly consists of slugs and snails. 
Glow-Worms, it should be noted, are not the only 

51 



BRITISH INSECTS 



creatures in Britain which bear a phosphorescent Hght, 
as certain kinds of Centipedes also bear a trail of Ught, 
and one should not be mistaken for the other. The 
adult female Glow Worm is flat in form, with promi- 
nent segments, and a sombre grey dress. She is wing- 
less, and the winged male is much more rarely discovered. 
Both are of nocturnal habits. 

When Summer is at its height large numbers of 
small, red-coloured insects may be found on such wild 
plants as yellow parsnip (the ancestor of the garden 
parsnip), hogweed, and other flowers. This is the 
Soldier Beetle {Telepliorus fusciis), and represents the 
Soldiers and Sailors (red and blue) of the insect-world. 
The family is known as the Telephoridce. It is not only 
the colour that entitles them to represent the Army and 
Navy, as they are great fighters, and if some of each are 
kept in confinement they will fight and devour each 
other. They may easily be captured when found on 
flower-heads, but will sometimes take to flight. Pre- 
sumably the nectar secreted by certain umbelliferous 
plants (such as yellow parsnip) attracts them. If so, 
it is interesting to observe that such a bloodthirsty 
creature has, at least, a sweet " tooth." 

The Elaterida includes the Skipjack, or Click Beetle, 
(Agriotes lineatus), the larvaj of which — called Wire- 
worms — are so very injurious to crops. This species 
has acquired its popular name from its habit of throwing 
itself into the air with a jerk when placed on its back. 
As it does this, it makes a sudden clicking noise. There 
52 



SKIPJACK AND OIL BEETLES 

are several species, but the one mentioned is a very able 
representative of its fellows. It is a small, long, narrow 
insect, and the yellow larva is nearly an inch long when 
full-grown. It has a hard cylindrical and polished body, 
with a few short hairs, a hard, dark-coloured head, and 
strong jaws. The three pairs of legs are placed on the 
first three segments, and on the last segment there is 
a lump, or swelling. As the larval state is assumed for 
at least three years, the amount of damage perpetrated 
is enormous. Nothing comes amiss to them, and only 
the efforts of some kinds of birds (such as Jackdaws, 
Rooks, and Starlings) save us from a plague of these 
plant-pests. The well-known form of the Oil Beetle 
{Meloe proscarabums. Fig. 19), is more often seen in 




Oil Be-n^ 



early Spring, when the slow-moving creature crawls 
from its hiding place for the purpose of feeding, mating, 
and depositing eggs. On St. Bees Head, Cumberland, 
I once counted several hundreds of these beetles in 

53 



BRITISH INSECTS 



various sizes, all congregated on the slopes of that fine 
grassy headland. Many were in the act of mating, 
but why such a large number happened to meet in such 
a confined area I have never been able to understand. 
Was it a regular meeting-place of the clans ? This 
is a parasite when in the larval state, as it feeds upon 
the eggs, young, or stored-up food of other insects. 
Before it reaches the pupal state it undergoes several 
changes of form, but the adult may always be known by 
its dull black body, and the female in particular by the 
length of her clearly ringed abdomen, and very short 
elytra. When handled, it exudes a caustic secretion 
for protective purposes, and this, when extracted, is 
used medicinally as cantharidine. The eggs of at least 
one species of Meloe Beetle are laid in the ground, and 
the larva crawls into the heart of a wayside flower and 
contrives to attach itself to a bee's body when the latter 
is pursuing its sweet pillage. As a result, it is carried 
to the bee's home where, becoming detached after its 
exhilarating joy-ride, it slips into one of the cells, and 
soon consumes the egg, or grub, of the rightful owner, 
and gobbles up the food placed there for the bee's own 
young ! It then pupates, and eventually crawls forth 
as the creature known by sight to almost every country- 
dweller who has eyes to see. The Oil Beetle belongs 
to the Family Meloidce. 

The Ciirculionidce, or Weevils, are a very large family 
of vegetarians, and from these we may select the Apple 
Blossom Weevil {Anthonomus pomorufn), and Nut Weevil 
54 



WEEVILS & ELM BARK BEETLES 

{Balaninus nuciim). The former kills the flower buds of 
apples and pears, the result of an egg deposited in each 
bud, and the consequent ravages of the larva, but there 
are others which produce excrescences upon turnips, 
or disembowel oak leaves, and a whole plantation of 
Austrian pines has been destroyed by Pissodes notatus. 
Others resort to beans, peas, plums, raspberries, and 
vines. The Apple Blossom Weevil has a snout, or 
rostrum, about half as long as its body. It is blackish, 
with a greyish down, and is of nocturnal habits. The 
larva feeds on the vital organs of the flower — the stamens 
and pistil — and the adult eats the leaves. The egg 
hatches in a few days after being laid, the larva appearing 
as a white maggot. It only feeds for a week or two, 
and then pupates. But the harm is already done by 
then. Fruit trees should be sprayed in February with 
Winter spray fluid, or caustic alkali, or with arsenate of 
lead just before the buds open. 

The circular holes so often seen in hazel-nuts are 
caused by the larva of the Nut Weevil which feeds upon 
the tasty interior. The little round hole gives away the 
secret where the creature made good its escape after 
having had its fill by eating away its " home." We 
have still to consider another destructive family of 
beetles in the Scolytidce, among which may be men- 
tioned the Elm Bark Beetle {Scolytus destructor, Fig. 20). 
Although these are only small insects, they do a great 
deal of damage, as the larvae feed on the layer of wood 
just underneath the bark. If a dead piece of bark is 

55 



BRITISH INSECTS 



ripped off, doubtless the observer will see the curious 
markings made by this beetle as a result of its ravages- 
The female Scolytus bores a hole under the bark of the 
living tree, and then inserts her eggs. In due course, 
the eggs hatch, and the larvae commence their depreda- 

A 

Eli-n Q>ar\: P)<»,tj*. 

tions. Egg-laying takes place in June, pupation in 
July, and emergence in August, so that no time is lost. 
Some, however, hibernate and appear as perfect insects 
the succeeding May. This species has a black polished 
head and thorax, with dark brown elytra. The larva is 
a white, fleshy, legless grub. 

The Pine Beetle {Hylurgus piniperda), belongs to the 
same family, and is a forest pest. It attacks young 
shoots of Scots pine trees. The adult is bronze-black, 
with a blunt head, short clubbed antennas (characteristic 
of the Scolytida), and rough wing-cases. 

Of the Cerambycidte, which are wood-eaters and do 
much damage among forest trees, we may select the 
Musk Beetle (Aromta jnoschata. Fig. 21), which has very 
long and slender antennae. It has acquired its popular 
name because of the pleasant odour it emits, and in some 
56 



TIMBERMAN & PEA AND BEAN BEETLES 



districts is called the Squeaker as it produces a shrill 
sound by friction. It is green in colour, and is not of 
very active disposition. The larva is the wood-feeder. 




Musk Be-eJle/ 



One more British Longicorn should be mentioned 
before passing on, and that is the Timberman Beetle 
(Astinonms adilis). It has extraordinarily long antennae, 
and is resident in the north country where the larva? 
burrow into pine trees, and thus commit a good deal of 
damage. 

The Pea and Bean Beetles belong to the family Bru- 
chidce, and both are to be regarded as pests. The 
Pea Beetle {Rriichus pisi), is black, with greyish-brown 
down. The wing-cases are rather short, and the un- 
covered portion of the abdomen is whitish, with dark 
spots. To distinguish the Pea from the Bean Beetle 
{B. rufimanus), the latter has the front legs all-red, and 

57 



BRITISH INSECTS 



the abdomen tip does not bear any spots. The thighs 
of the Pea Beetle are black. The eggs of the one species 
are laid on young pea pods, and the other confines itself 
to the bean. A round hole shows the place of emergence 
after pupation. The fat, yellowish-white larva is 
wrinkled. At first it has three pairs of very small legs, 
but these eventually disappear. 

The Chrysomelidce mostly includes leaf- feeders, and 
some of these are regarded as very serious pests. They 
protect themselves by exuding an obnoxious juice, and 
a Foreign species is so poisonous that the natives of 
Ngamiland use it for poisoning their arrows. 

The Mustard Beetle (Phadofi cochlearice), is a common 
British species which destroys the leaves of mustard, 
and the Asparagus Beetle {Crioceris asparagi), is injurious 
to the plant after which it is named. It has bluish- 
green wing-cases bordered with red, and three yellow 
spots on each, with a red thorax, and is about a quarter 
of an inch in length. It eats, both as a larva and adult, 
all parts of the asparagus plant, both above and below 
ground. The brownish, oval eggs are laid in large 
numbers during June on the plant attacked, and the 
larvae are actually ready to pupate in about a fortnight. 
By then, of course, great damage has been done. The 
adult hibernates among soil, or dead leaves, during 
Winter. 

The family Tenehrionidce includes the Mealworm 

Beetle {Tenebrio tnoUtor), which is a well-known pest in 

mills and granaries. It is a long, narrow rust-coloured 
68 



MEALWORM & CHURCHYARD BEETLES 

insect, bearing a small head, pointed at the back. It 
has three pairs of short legs on the thorax, and there are 
two small appendages on the last segment. Captive 
birds are very fond of the larvae (called mealworms) of 
this species, and any boy smitten with a desire to add 
to his pocket money might do well to breed them, as 
there is a good demand, and the supply seems to be 
limited. I hand on the suggestion for what it may be 
worth. 
The Cellar Beetle (Blaps mucronata Fig. 22), belongs 




Cellar Deetl^j-. 



to the Blaptidce, and is so-called because of its fondness 
for damp, underground haunts. It is dull dead-black 
in colour, of sluggish habits, and gives off an unpleasant 
odour. Its wings are not developed, and the elytra 
are fastened together. A cousin of this species, known 
as the Churchyard Beetle {Blaps nwrtisaga) is not so 
common as the first-mentioned, and is less familiar in 
the Southern Counties. 

59 



BRITISH INSECTS 



The Tortoise-Beetle (Cassia viriJis), belongs to the 
CassididfS, and is an interesting insect because the elytra, 
or wing-cases, remind one of the carapace, or shield, 
of the four-legged creature after which it has been 
popularly named. The egg is deposited in a cell of 
remarkable honeycomb pattern, and is manufactured 
by the female from a sticky substance obtained from 
her own body. The larva has a pair of long tails which 
are carried over the back, and it is rayed all round with 
curious feathery appendages, and has dots on the sides. 
The pupa has feathery appendages on the head, and 
others protrude from the sides. 



ORDER VI . NEUROPTERA, OR NERVE- WINGED 

INSECTS 

So-called because their wings are covered with a 
network of nerves — thus Nerve-Winged — the insects 
belonging to this Order may be divided into six Sub- 
Orders thus : — I. Corrodentia (Book Lice), 2. Plecoptera 
(Stone Flies), 3. Sinlida (Alder Flies), 4. Planipennia 
(Scorpion Flies and Lacewing), 5. Ephemeroptera (May- 
Flies), and 6. Odonata (Dragon Flies). Outside Britain 
there are the wonderful White-Ants, or Termites, which 
come under the Sub-Order Isoptera., but with these 
60 



Plate II. 







.-liSb' 



i \ 
'J 




:^ 




I. Yellow-banded Humble Bee. 2. Lacewing Fly. 3. Hornet. 

4. Giant-tailed Sawfly. 



BOOK-LICE 



remarkable creatures and others we are not here con- 
cerned. We now have to consider the chief character- 
istics of each Sub-Order mentioned, and to select re- 
presentative forms of each. 



I. Sub-Order Corrodentia (Book Lice) 



These are small, soft-bodied insects which have an 
incomplete metamorphosis. As a rule, the head is 
somewhat large, and bears conspicuous eyes. The 
long antennae are made up of about a dozen joints. 
When wings are present, there are two pairs, those at 
the rear being smaller than the front pair. When at 
rest, the latter are held in a roof-like position. Some 
species are altogether wingless. A favourite haunt is 
a trunk, or branch, of a tree, others are fond of dead 
wood. 

A common species that may serve as an example to 
represent this Sub-Order is known as Atropos divinatoria. 
I do not know its English name. It is often found in 
damp houses, and is a nuisance in Museums where there 
are specimens of plants and insects. Like the Death- 
Watch Beetle already dealt with, this insect makes a 
tapping, or ticking, noise, which is probably a love- 
signal as in the former case. 

F 61 



BRITISH INSECTS 



2. Sub-Order Plecoptera (Stone Flies) 



The Stone Flies belong to the family Perlidce, and they 
also have an incomplete metamorphosis. They are 
fair-sized insects, with long slender antennae. It should 
be noted that the hind wings are larger than the front 
pair. The larvae are water-dwellers, and they subsist 
upon both decayed vegetable substances and animal 
food. When the larva is full-grown it crawls to land, 
the skin splits along the back, and the perfect insect 
emerges. This latter frequents trees, and is very active. 



3. Sub-Order Sialida (Alder Flies) 



The Alder Fly {Sialis lutaria, Figs. 23 and 24), is in- 
cluded in this Sub-Order, and unUke the foregoing, it 
has complete metamorphoses. The adult has the head 
embedded in the prothorax, and it has long and slender 
antennae. The two pairs of wings are of different 
shape. As a rule the eggs are laid on various plants 
near water, and as soon as the larva hatches, it makes 
for the liquid element, where it spends its time in the 
mud feeding upon small aquatic creatures. The body 
62 



THE ALDER FLY 



of the larva tapers almost to a point. It is prominently 
segmented, and bears feathery appendages on each side, 
in addition to the legs. When ready to leave the water, 
the larva crawls to land and conceals itself in the ground. 



Fig. 24. 





Alder Fly Larva. 
(Enlarged.) 



There it pupates, and eventually emerges as the perfect 
insect. It has a heavy flight, and in appearance is not 
unHke the well-known Caddis Fly. But it does not 
fold its wings longitudinally, and may thus be distin- 
guished. 



63 



BRITISH INSECTS 



4. Sub-Order Planipennia (Scorpion Flies and Lace- 

WINCS) 



This large Sub-Order contains a great many different 
families both at home and abroad, but we can only hope 
to give place here to a few of these. 

The Scorpion Fly [Panorpa communis, Fig. 25), belongs 




to the family Panorpidce, which scientific name has been 
accorded because of the curious end of the abdomen 
ill the male. The eggs are laid under ground, and the 
larva feeds upon decaying vegetable matter, or rotten 
wood. When full-fed, it burrows deeper in the soil, 
and emerges after about a fortnight in the pupal state. 
It is then polished black, with yellow legs, and trans- 
parent wings having brown spots. Although an active 
species, and perhaps fearsome-looking, the Scorpion 
*Fly is immune from harm to human folk. 
64 



SNAKE AND LACEWING FLIES 

The Snake Fly {Raphidia cognata), next claims atten- 
tion, and is sometimes known as the Camel Fly. It 
belongs to the Raphidiid<e. Between the head and 
thorax there is a long " neck " which affords the insect 
much freedom of movement. The popular name is 
derived from the snake-like motion of the head and 
neck. The adult haunts water, but the larva makes 
its home under the bark of trees. The latter, as well 
as the former, is somewhat of a contortionist, as it 
throws its body into very curious attitudes. 

The Osmylidce are dehcate and beautiful insects of 
wide distribution, one species of which {Osrnylus chrysops) 
may be discovered in the New Forest, but we must 
pass on to a closely allied family, the Chrysopidce, our 
choice of species being the Lacewing Fly {Chrysopa 
perla) (Fig. 26). The delicate green colour, and equally 




icj-.a6. Lacec^mq T\y. 



delicate structure, of the gauzy wings of this really 
beautiful creature help to make it one of the loveliest 
objects in Nature. Small wonder the names of Lace- 
wing and Golden-Eyes should be conferred, as the 
wonderful wings and bright golden, or coppery, eyes 

65 



BRITISH INSECTS 



deserve all the praise that can be bestowed. The wings, 
when at rest, are held longitudinally, and the thin taper- 
ing body, and frail constitution, of the Lacewing will 
at once be patent to the lucky discoverer. It is a fre- 
quent visitor to our gardens, and to be suddenly con- 
fronted with a specimen at rest reveals " a thing of 
beauty and joy for ever." It is curious that such a 
lovely insect should give off an offensive smell when 
handled. The white eggs are laid in batches, and each 
one is attached to a leaf, or other object, by a long thread. 
The larva is a mark on green-fly, and should be highly 
encouraged. After having its fill, the larva spins a 
round cocoon in which it passes the pupal stage of its 
existence, finally emerging as the beautiful and useful 
creature we have discovered it to be. 



5. Sub-Order Ephemeroptera (Mayflies) 



Also of delicate structure, the Mayfly {Ephemera 
vulgaris, Figs. 27 and 28), has the hind wings much 
smaller than the front pair, very short antennae, and 
two or three long streamers, or tails, at the extremity 
of the body. But it is the life-history, rather than the 
anatomy, of the insect that is so wonderful. Shortly 
stated, this is as follows. The eggs are dropped into 
66 



THE MAYFLY 



the water by the short-Hved adult female, and those 
that are not devoured by creatures who lie in wait for 
such tasty provender, sink to the bottom of the pond, 
or stream. In due course the egg hatches into a larva 




Fig. 27, Mayfly. 
(Nymph.) 




which passes its days in a circular hole in the bank of 
the water. Thereafter the nymph emerges, and this 
has feathery antennae, and a triple " tail," with a number 
of short bristles on either side of the abdomen. The 

67 



BRITISH INSECTS 



nymph crawls out of the water when full-grown, the 
skin enveloping it at once spHts asunder, and the winged 
insect comes forth. This all happens very quickly, 
and when the rise of the Mayfly takes place, the observer 
is able to watch at close quarters this magic transforma- 
tion. All is not complete even when the insect is clear 
of its watery home, as another skin has to be discarded 
before the perfect state is reached. For a few brief 
moments the winged form pursues its airy course down- 
stream. Many fall by the way, to be devoured by 
trout and other fish, and those that do succeed in keeping 
on the wing soon live their little day and cease to be. 
But some, at least, are spared long enough to mate and 
deposit their eggs, so that the future of the race is assured. 
The fully-developed Mayfly has greenish-yellow wings, 
with dark spots. The body is pale yellow, with some 
dark lemon streaks on the lower part, and an almost 
black thorax. It is interesting to notice that, although 
it takes at least two years to acquire the adult state, the 
perfect insect only enjoys a brief flight in the sunshine, 
and then passes away. The larva feeds mostly upon 
vegetable matter, but some species are partly carnivorous. 
When the " rise " does occur, large numbers may be 
observed emerging if the right moment is struck. I 
have seen the air, ground, and water thickly populated 
with the insects and their old nymphal shrouds, and 
perhaps of all the amazing episodes associated with these 
forms of life, the rise and fall of the Mayfly is one of 
the most entrancing in the whole realm of Nature. 
68 



DRAGON FLIES 



6. Sub-Order Odonata (Dragon Flies) 

Dragon Flies, eitlier because of the forepart of their 
English name, or their so-called fearsome appearance, 
are not at all well liked, in addition to which they are 
popularly supposed to " sting," indeed at least one 
British species is dubbed " Horse-Stinger " (Fig. 29). 




V52.9 



To those who know them, however, and are acquainted 
with their wonderful life-histories, these remarkable 
creatures of water and air make a strong appeal. That 
Dragon Flies are of ancient lineage is proved by fossil 
remains that have been discovered, and both the larval 

69 



BRITISH INSECTS 



and adult forms have been found in a fossil state. Re- 
mains of an insect allied to the present creatures has 
also been recorded from carboniferous strata, which 
actually measured two feet in expanse of wings, so that 
since that far-off time insects have greatly decreased 
in size. The oval-shaped eggs are deposited in the 
water, and in due course the hungry and voracious 
larva makes its appearance. It is one of the terrors of 
the pond, or stream, in which it resides, and is dull 
grey, or brownish-green, in colour. It is the possessor 
of a curious two-jointed " mask," which can be tucked 
away, or extended, at will. On the outer joint a pair of 
strong jaws are situate, and these are capable of great 
execution upon the body of a victim. Woe betide 
any unwary creature upon whom the predatory larva 
decides to prey. Although it crawls sluggishly on the 
bed of the water, the larva has the power of forcing its 
way through the liquid element by means of a remarkable 
contrivance which runs through the centre of its body. 
The larva is very unlike the adult, and when the nymphal 
state is reached only the presence of rudimentary wings 
distinguishes it from the larva. When ready to emerge, 
the nymph leaves its watery home, climbs up the stem 
of an adjacent plant, rail, or post by the water-side, 
and waits for the greatest event of its mysterious life. 
The skin spHts, and after a series of efforts and gymnas- 
tic performances, the perfect insect emerges. During 
these evolutions it turns, at least, one complete somer- 
sault, and onlv those who have been fortunate enough to 
70 



DRAGON FLIES 



witness the transformation can have any idea of its 
romantic interest and fascination. At last the Dragon 
Fly frees itself from inside the cuticle, or old skin, but 
clings tightly to it for anchorage and support, whilst 
its body and wings lengthen almost before one's eyes. 
Gradually the body and wings attain their full extent, 
the outer covering and the wings harden on contact 
with the air, the latter are then spread cross-wise for 




Tigr. 30. Grcar 



Dracron Fl^ 



the first time, in readiness for flight, and away goes this 
insect-dragon of the air upon its initial voyage through 
space (Fig. 30). It is a dramatic moment to witness, 
and worth going a long way to see. Some species are 
slow fliers, others possess ease, speed, and facility. To 

71 



BRITISH INSECTS 



see them hovering, skimming, somersaulting, or planing 
down is quite a delightful occupation, as also to watch 
them in nuptial flight around the margins, or over the 
surface of a favourite pond. Both in the larval and 
adult states a carnivorous diet is partaken of, and men- 
tion should also be made of the large goggle eyes made 
up of a large number of separate lenses or facets, and of 
the beautiful colours some of the species display. Some 
have thick bodies, others very slim. In some species 
both pairs of wings are more or less similar, in others the 
wings are alike. In the former, the hind wings are 
enlarged near the base, in the latter both pairs are equally 
narrowed at the base. The delicacy of the wings is 
not the least remarkable feature, and certainly not the 
least attractive. 

There are over forty British species, and of these 
the more familiar that may be mentioned are the fol- 
lowing : — 

Libellula depressa, Anax imperafor, JE^chna xyanea, 
Calopteryx virgo, Pyrrhosoma ?iy?nphula, Enallagma 
cyathigerum. 



72 



THE CADDIS FLY 



ORDER VII. TRICHOPTERA, OR CADDIS 

FLIES 

These insects are divided into seven different families, 
but it will serve our purpose to set out a few salient 
features, and illustrate our remarks by a consideration 




Caci3iv.ifl._y 



Fig. 31, Caddis Fly Larva. 
(Twice natural size.) 

of the life-story of the familiar Caddis Fly {Phrygonea 
grandis, Figs. 31 and 32) known by sight to £<U those 
whose country expeditions in Summer take them to 

73 



BRITISH INSECTS 



pond or stream where this insect-denizen loves to dwell. 
There are more than 170 British species. The adult 
has long, slender antennae and legs, the front wings are 
more or less covered with hair, and held roof-like when 
at rest. The hind wings are less leathery, and are held 
pleated when at rest. Trichoptera means " hairy- 
winged," from the Greek trichos—hair, and pteron—a 
wing. The eggs are laid in water, and the larva, soon 
after hatching, prepares for itself a case, or tube, in which 
its soft, grub-like body can be protected. Sometimes 
these cases are made of small pieces of sticks or leaves, 
at others they are composed of fine grains of sand glued 
together. Others bear upon them small water-snails 
in which their owners are also contained. The tube 
nicely fits the larva, and is just a Uttle longer each end 
than the creature's own body. The tail end appears to be 
sealed up, but the front door remains open until such 
time as the larva is ready to pupate. The reason for 
this is that the latter is thus able to protrude its head 
and legs so as to crawl about and procure food. It 
fastens itself to stones, submerged posts, piles, and other 
objects. To dislodge one from its habitation requires 
some force, as it has two strong hooks which enable it 
to secure a firm grip inside. It pupates within the 
case, taking the precaution to close the front entrance 
before this takes place, and when the almost complete 
creature is ready to emerge, it swims to the surface 
by means of its two middle legs, which are fashioned 
like oars. This accomplished, the skin splits down the 
74 



ORDER LEPIDOPTERA 



back, and the imago is free. After emergence, the flies 
may be found clinging to herbage surrounding water, 
and Swallows and Martins have a rare old feast picking 
them off in double-quick time. It has a somewhat 
laboured flight, and this in spite of the strong wings. 
The larva is a vegetarian in diet. 



ORDER VIII. LEPIDOPTERA, OR BUTTERFLIES 

AND MOTHS 

This large order of scale-winged insects has already 
been dealt with in a separate volume of " The Abbey 
Nature Books," and is merely included here to show 
the place occupied in the classification adopted. The 
reader desirous of obtaining information concerning 
our British Butterflies and Moths is, therefore, referred 
to the fourth volume in this Series, where a large number 
of commoner species are dealt with and fully illustrated 
in both colour and black and white. 



BRITISH INSECTS 



ORDER IX. DIPTERA, OR FLIES, MOSQUITOES, 
MIDGES, AND FLEAS 

Comparatively few entomologists specialise in the 
insects contained in this important Order, and there 
are any number of new species to be found for the 
searching. Many are very small, and only the in- 
dustrious collector is likely to discover them. One 
indefatigable worker in our own district — Mr. F. W. 
Edwards, B.A., F.E.S. — has not only added a large 
number of new species to our Hertfordshire fauna, but 
has also put on record several kinds new to Britain. 
Flies and Fleas, as we may popularly call them, are not 
alluring in their attractiveness, but are rather despised 
creatures into whose domestic affairs the average in- 
dividual takes precious good care not to intrude. How- 
beit. we must include them here^ so as to carry out our 
scheme of treatment satisfactorily. They pass through 
a complete change from egg to imago, the adult has a 
slender attachment between the head and thorax, and 
the thorax and abdomen are fused together. The 
larva is, as a rule, legless, and bears a small head, but 
this does not hold good with regard to that of the Gnat, 
which has a large head and well-developed mouth, and 
other parts of quite a different character. 

The Common Flea {Pulex irritans, Figs. 33 to 36), 
76 



THE COMMON FLEA 



is a fit representative of the Pulicidce, and the illustrations 
set out below will convey a better idea of its meta- 
morphoses than a detailed description. It breeds in 
neglected dirty houses, and its general appearance is 
only too well known. Professor J. Arthur Thomson 



Fig. 33. 






Fig. 34. 



Fig. 36. 



Fig. 35. 



Fig. 33, Egg. Fig. 34, Larva. Fig. 35, Pupa. Fig. 36, 
Imago of Common Flea. 



facetiously calls it " The Nimble Flea," and tells us 
that, of the 500 known species, nearly one-tenth of 
these (50) are found in Britain. In structure, activity, 
mode of existence, piercing and sucking apparatus, and 
the rest this energetic little insect is of extreme interest, 
G 77 



BRITISH INSECTS 



even if possessed of most obnoxious habits. It even 
excited the attention of one of the world's greatest men, 
Socrates, who stopped to enquire how far it could jump. 
As a matter of fact, we are told it can jump four inches 
into the air and about a foot on the level. As Prof. 
Thomson says : " It is quite far enough." Pulex irritans 
is found tenanting the wil}' old Badger, as well as human- 
kind, the eggs being laid among the animal's fur, or 
in dusty cracks and crevices of houses. The active 
larva — a small legless grub which moves by the aid of 
bristles — lives on organic matter, and after twice casting 
its skin, the pupal state is reached. In due course the 
perfect Flea is ready to emerge from the cocoon-envelope, 
but it often waits until someone, or something, " pulls 
the trigger of activity," and thus releases it. Minus 
wings, the Flea must certainly be regarded as a bit of a 
masterpiece, and its " muscular explosiveness verges 
on the miraculous." Nevertheless, it is a great nuisance 
and a serious pest, for, between 1896 and 191 1, upwards 
of seven million people died in India from Bubonic 
Plague, mainly through the bite of a Rat-Flea {Xeno- 
psylla cheopsis) which transfers the virulent microbe 
from rat to rat, and from rat to man. Flea-control 
and Rat-control are essential, especially in our ports, 
harbours, congested cities, and other places. But we 
must not be tempted to pursue the subject further, 
and a mere list of names and usual hosts would occupy 
more space than we have at disposal. 

The Cecidomyiidcs consist of a family of very small 
78 



GALL MIDGES AND GNATS 



and delicate insects known as Gall Midges. The larva 
of a number of them are gall-makers, producing swellings 
in the stems of plants, and another species — Contarinia 
tritici, or Corn Midge — does much harm to oats and 
barley. It has a cousin called the Hessian Fly {Ceci- 
domyia destructor), which is also a grain destroyer, but 
being subject in England to various parasites, its numbers 
are kept within respectable limits. 

Of the Bibionidcs — or Dung Flies — whose larvae live 
on decaying vegetable matter, and also consume living 
roots — ^the St. Mark's Fly {Bibio Marct) occurs in large 
numbers in Spring. It is all-black, and has long hairy 
legs. 

Gnats belong to the Cub'cidce, and the Spanish word 
Mosquito is frequently used instead. Much attention 
has been devoted to these insects, because of their un- 
welcome habit of drawing blood from the human body, 
and as carriers of the fatal germ of malaria. Mosquito 
brigades have had to be organised to combat their 
energies, and stirring tales might be told of how man 
has eventually conquered. The making of the Panama 
Canal was only made possible after ways and means 
had been discovered for dealing with these small, but 
death-dealing parasites. 

The Common Gnat {Culex pipiens, Fig. 37), passes 
its early life in still water, and the filthier the better. 
Hence, all standing water should, as far as possible, 
be done away with, and the breeding quarters reduced 
to a minimum. The larva floats on the surface with 

79 



BRITISH INSECTS 



the head held downwards and the tail extruded. It 
moves about by jerky motions, sweeps into its mouth 
microscopic food by means of a profusion of hairs, and 
maintains itself at the surface (the creature itself being 
heavier than water) by floating on the surface-film with 
which the pond, or other water, is covered. The pupa 
is quite unlike the larva, being almost a fully-formed 
adult, though shrouded in a transparent skin. It now 




CrioT 



extrudes its head instead of the tail, as the air-tubes 
have become exactly reversed. Very soon the pupal 
skin splits along the back, and the perfect insect makes 
good its escape. The adult male may be known by its 
bushy feelers, and it is only the female which possesses 
a piercing apparatus. She deposits her eggs in the water, 
and these, being sticky, adhere to one another. Two 
to three hundred of these will be laid at a " sitting," 
and when all are fastened together, a little raft is formed 
80 



CRANE AND HOVER FLIES 



which is then set free on its adventurous voyage. The 
wing of one of these insects is a very beautiful object 
for the microscope, but the creature is an inveterate 
enemy of mankind, and must be dealt with as such, 
no matter how much its wonder of form and life are 
regarded. 

Our old friend the Crane Fly, or Daddy Longlegs, 
{Tipula oleracea) finds a place among the Tipulidce. 
The tapering body, large gauzy wings, and long legs, 
as well as the blundering gait, are familiar enough to 
all country dwellers. It affects grassy districts in par- 
ticular, the female laying her eggs among the roots of 
this, and other plants. The hard larva is called a 
Leather-jacket, and he it is who does the mischief. 
The female may be known from her mate by having 
a pointed extremity (the ovipositor) at the end of her 
body. 

Hover-Flies (Syrphtdce) are both beneficial and de- 
structive. Some of their larvae feed upon aphids, or 
green-fly, and are stated to be leech-like in form. Two 
common species that may be mentioned are Syrphus 
albostriatus and S. ribesii. The habit of the adult in 
hovering, or hawking, in the air with rapidly vibrating 
wings accounts for the popular name. I have noticed 
that, day after day, in Summer, a certain Hover Fly 
may be seen in more or less the same place — its happy 
hunting ground apparently — and its quick movements 
and marvellous wing-vibrations never fail to excite my 
interest, admiration, and wonder. There are other 

81 



BRITISH INSECTS 



species whose larvas live in filthy water, on excrement, 
and other insanitary places. There are others {Volu- 
cella) which prefer taking up their abode in the nests 
of humble-bees and wasps, and others again (Merodon) 
which feed upon narcissus bulbs, and perpetrate con- 
siderable damage. There are a number of dipterous 
flies belonging to the Family Tachinidce, many of the 
larvae of which are, like the very large family of Ichneu- 
mons, parasitic in caterpillars. There is, however, this 
difference that whereas the female Ichneumon Fly 
pierces the skin of the caterpillar, and at once deposits 
her eggs inside the host, the Tachinidce have no ovipositor 
with which to make the puncture, and thus deposit 
their eggs on the outside. The larva, on hatching, 
however, soon eats through the skin, and works its way 
to the interior upon which it feeds. 

Of the House Fly {Musca domestica), and Blow Fly 
{Musca corvina) — both of which belong to the Family 
Muscidce — it is only necessary to say that, whereas they 
and their numerous congeners act as scavengers and 
sanitary-agents, there is another side to the picture as, 
feeding very often in distasteful places and then visiting 
our own food-stuffs, they are not altogether friends 
worthy of encouragement. They do some good, they 
also perpetrate much harm. Decaying matter soon 
attracts females to the spot, eggs are laid, grubs soon 
hatch, and thrive upon the filth that is provided. The 
general appearance of these familiar creatures does not 
call for mention. 
82 



THE EOT FLIES 



Although the Family (Estridce, or Bot Flies, is not 
extensive, it is too important to be overlooked as it 
includes at least three species which are parasitic upon 
the horse, ox, and sheep. These are the Horse Bot 
Fly {Gastrophilus equi). Ox Warble Fly {Hypoderma 
bovts and Imeatum), and Sheep Nostril Fly {CEstrus ovts). 
The larva, which is a parasite upon the horse, finds its 
way into the stomach, those on the backs of oxen are 
found under the skin, and the one that attacks the placid 
sheep is discovered around the nostrils of the fleecy- 
clad animal. 

The Horse Bot somewhat resembles a bee in 
appearance. It is brownish in colour and hairy, and 
has a stout body. The larvas feed upon the mem- 
brane of the horse's stomach, and attach themselves 
by hooks. As many as a thousand larvae have been 
found in a single horse. 

The Ox Bot is black, with white hairs on the head, 
thorax, and tip of abdomen. It also is very hairy. 
Having no mouth, the adult insect takes no food. It 
is the larva which does the damage. The mature insect 
only flies in sunshine, and may then be seen attacking the 
legs of cattle, whereon the eggs are chiefly laid. The 
larva is Ucked into the mouth by the beast attacked, 
but eventually makes its way through the flesh of its 
host to the back. 

The Sheep Nostril Fly is yellowish-brown, with black 
and silvery-white hairs on the abdomen. The female 
may produce either eggs or living larv^, and these 

83 



BRITISH INSECTS 



are deposited in the nostrils of the sheep, and cause 
much suffering to the poor inoffensive animal. Great 
irritation is caused, and the symptom of attack is con- 
tinuous sneezing. There are still more parasites upon 
mammals and birds in the group of dipterous insects 
known as the Hippohoscidce . It is only possible to give 
the names of four species by way of illustration, and 




Fig. 38, Biting Midge. (Greatly Enlarged.) 



these are the Forest Fly {Hippohosca equina) found on 
horses ; Lipoptena cervi on deer ; Sheep Ked (Melo- 
phagiis ovinus) on sheep, and Stenopteryx hirmidinis 
which attaches itself to the gentle House Martin that 
warbles so pleasantly when on its nest under the eaves. 
Midges, especially towards sundown and near water, 
are a great nuisance. Small they may be, but capable, 
84 



MIDGES AND GAD FLIES 



nevertheless, of great irritation as they attack the face 
or hands of the wayfarer. I have often been tormented 
with this obnoxious Httle irritant in Scotland where, 
of course, it is as difficult to get away from water as 
from a motor car along the nearest highway. One of 
the commonest species is Culicoides pulicaris, which is 
shown greatly enlarged in Fig. 38. It is only one of a 
number of True Midges belonging to the Family Chiro- 
nomidce, whose unwelcome attentions are known to 
almost everyone. 

Of the Tabanidce, or Gad Flies, we may select for 
brief reference the Blinding Breeze Fly {Chrysops coecii- 
tiens), Rain Breeze Fly, or Clegg {Hcematopota pluvialts)y 
and the Autumnal Breeze Fly {Tabanus autumnalis, 
Fig- 39)' The first named is so-called because it attacks 







Autumna 



cattle and horses around the eyes. It has a broad band 
of brown across the centre of the wings, and a dull green 
abdomen which, instead of being rounded, or pointed, 
ends abruptly. The Clegg is a grey insect with mottled 
wings, which, when one is in the vicinity of water, will 
sometimes settle on one's clothing, or exposed part of 

85 



BRITISH INSECTS 



the body. It is a great blood-sucker, and should be 
studiously avoided. The third species mentioned above 
is a close relative of the Gad Fly {Tabanus hovinus), and 
both are the source of much annoyance to cattle and 
horses. T. autumnalis is co-called because it appears 
in Autumn. It is dark brown in colour, and has a 
more pointed abdomen than the other two Breeze Flies 
already referred to. 

The Humble Bee Fly {Bomhylius major. Fig. 40), is 



HumkU- Y E'^-e- riy. 




worthy of brief mention. It is a bee-like insect belong- 
ing to the Family Bombylidcs, and seems to be fond of 
haunting shady woodsides and similar places, where it 
pursues an energetic life, darting hither and thither 
with its long tongue fully extended, as shown in our 
illustration of this species. The larva lives in the nests 
of humble bees, and the likeness of the adult to the 
host is probably of much assistance to it. 



86 



THE RED MEADOW ANT 



ORDER X. HYMENOPTERA, OR ANTS, BEES, 
WASPS, SAWFLIES, ICHNEUMONS, AND 

OTHERS 

We now reach the last Order of British Insects, the 
Hymenoptera, and perhaps the most important of all. 
More than one half of those with which we are con- 
cerned belong to the Group Aciileata, commencing with 
the Ants, and ending with the Bees. All these insects 
are Stingers, and the remainder (from the Ruby Wasp 
to the Ichneumons) are Non-Stingers. 

Of the communal instincts of some of these hymenop- 
terous insects, and the solitary habits of others, as also 
the economic uses of several of them, we have something 
to record later, and may at once concentrate attention upon 
the Heterogyna which embraces the Social Ants, of which 
there are over two thousand known species. The Red 
Meadow Ant {Myrmica rubra) is the first representative 
which calls for notice. Its name tells of its colour, and 
it is one of the most familiar. Ants are social creatures, 
living in communities, but as an individual the Ant is 
probably not highly-organised in intelligence. Yet, all 
work together co-operatively for the benefit of the 
whole, the welfare of the community being the impelling 
motive. The labour is divided, each one has its allotted 
task, and the concern with which invasion, or distur- 

87 



BRITISH INSECTS 



bance, is regarded will be known to all those who watch 
these insects at work and play. With few exceptions, 
there are three kinds of individuals in each community, 
made up of male, female, and worker. The latter is 
an imperfect female. This last-named has not alto- 
gether lost the power of egg-production, but she cannot 
be fertilised, and only produces males. The male has 
wings, so also has the female during the nuptial flight, 
after which they are cast or bitten off, but the worker is 
wingless. The small white larva is legless, the eggs are 
of microscopic size, and the pupa is the so-called " ant- 
egg." It may, or may not, be enclosed in a cocoon, 
according to the species. The food of Ants mostly 
consists of insects, fruit, nectar from plants, and the 
honey-dew secreted by aphids. Where one finds the 
latter there, sure enough, Ants will be in attendance. 
The worker seeks assiduously for food, and has the 
power of regurgitating a part to feed the inmates of the 
Ant-hill. These inmates need not all be Ants, as slaves 
and guests are both given apartments in the busy City. 
Ants are of some service in fertilising flowers, but not 
nearly to the same extent as Bees, as they do not travel 
so far afield, and more often restrict attention to a small 
area. Cross-fertilisation is, therefore, infrequent. The 
present species constructs large hillocks of earth, and 
the freshly-worked soil is plainly visible near the summit 
in early Spring. In Winter the inhabitants work their 
way well below ground, but at the call of the sun they 
approach nearer the surface. When the community 
88 



SOCIAL AND SOLITARY ANTS 



becomes overpopulated, a swarm will leave the hillock, 
the females become mated, and a fresh colony is founded. 
The Green Woodpecker is a great enemy of this species, 
and its cousin of the wood, and by means of his long 
sticky tongue he soon levies toll upon them. 

The Black, or Garden, Ant {Lasius niger), House 
Ant (My r mica molesta), and Yellow Ant {Lasius flavus)^ 
are other common species, and mention must also be 
made of the Wood Ant {Formica rufa, Fig. 41) which 




Fig vi 

Wood Ahr maU- 



inhabits fir and other woods, and constructs a large 
hillock consisting of soil, pieces of twigs, and other 
material. When the community is at its height, and 
its citizens are all busily occupied, a wonderful sight is 
presented when one examines the countless numbers 
of which the hillock, or home, is made up. 

The aforementioned are, it is almost unnecessary to 
point out, social creatures, but in the Fossores we make 
acquaintance with their solitary cousins. The Solitary 
Ant {Mutilla europcea), and Digger, or Sand Wasp {Amono- 
phila campestris), are two of these, and there are only 
two kinds of individuals (male and female) in each 

89 



BRITISH INSECTS 



species. The male only has wings, and these are not 
folded. The Digger Wasp preys upon grasshoppers. 

The Diploptera, or Wasps, includes several unpopular 
insects, of which the Hornet (Vespa crahroy Fig. 42) 




FifjA-2. Norne.r. 



may fitly be chosen as first representative. This fine 
insect is our largest British Wasp, and it should be 
remembered that, in addition to preying upon other 
insects, it does not damage fruit. Of course it is killed 
at sight, and whilst it is a formidable creature to en- 
counter if exasperated, the fact remains that it occupies 
an important place in the scale of Hfe, and need not 
be altogether condemned. The body is handsomely 
banded with black and yellow, and the large size at 
once distinguishes it. It places its large nest in hollow 
trees or buildings, and seems to be restricted to the 
Southern Counties. The nest is made of rotten wood, 
and is much yellower in colour than the more familiar 
grey ones of the smaller and commoner species. 

What may be termed the Larger Common Wasp is 
90 



THE LARGER COMMON WASP 

Vespa germanica. It is so well known by sight that 
familiarity breeds contempt, and whilst most books 
will probably say that its hfe-history is well known, we 
often doubt the veracity of this statement. The build- 
ing of a nest by the Queen in early Spring, the founding 
of a colony, the industry of the workers, the use of the 
drone, and the amazing structure of the completed home, 
are all very wonderful. The tiers of cells one above the 
other containing the eggs, grubs, or pupas, the little 
pedestals which are placed in position so as to separate 
one tier from another, the lightness in weight, yet 
strength and stability of the nest, are all of absorbing 
interest. Then, too, there is the collecting of food by 
the workers and the feeding of the hungry grubs, the 
aeration of the entrance hole by the drones, who seem 
told off for this special purpose, and the great industry 
and cleverness displayed in finding, tearing off, and 
carrying building material which consists of vegetable 
fibre. When the Queen Wasp first completes her 
nest unaided it is only about the size of an egg-cup, 
but she soon deposits some eggs, and when these have 
hatched, and the larvse pupated and emerged, she at 
once receives assistance from her own children in the 
gathering of further material, and subsequent enlarge- 
ment of the home. A piece of Wasp comb containing 
grubs and pupae was brought to my room at Letchworth 
Museum one day, and I placed it on a window-ledge 
inside the room. Next day I found that one or two 
Wasps were emerging from the cells, and it was interest- 

91 



BRITISH INSECTS 



ing to watch their struggles to be free. They bit away 
the sealed-up portion at the top, and then crawled out 
as liberated prisoners. They soon showed signs of 
great restlessness, so that I was tempted to open the 
window and let them fly away. Out of the window they 
flew, but to my amazement they returned in double- 
quick time, and commenced to feed the fat white grubs 
who seemed to anticipate their coming ! As others 
emerged, so the interesting development proceeded 
under my own eyes. I opened the window each day 
and the workers flew to and fro during the day, and 
returned each night. If, by chance, any had not re- 
turned at dusk, I found them outside the window next 
morning waiting to he admitted. Eventually all were 
reared, and the little colony left the fragment of comb 
emptied of all its contents as a memento of a thrilling 
episode of insect-life. Although watched at close 
quarters, the Wasps were far too occupied to attempt to 
sting anyone, and a great many visitors to my room 
witnessed the httle episode described. The grubs are 
fed on insect-food, but the adults appear to possess a 
sweet " tooth," and do a good deal of harm in the season 
to ripe fruit. This species makes its nest underground, 
hidden away from vulgar gaze. Hence its domestic 
affairs are little understood, or appreciated. Only the 
entrance hole can be seen from outside, and if destruc- 
tion is desired the best method is to use cyanide of 
potassium, either in soHd state or solution. 

The Wood Wasp {Vespa sylvestris) usually suspends 
92 



WOOD, TREE, AND MUD WASPS 

its nest from the branch of a bush or tree. We had 
one in Letchworth Museum which was built in a goose- 
berry bush at the time the fruit was on the branch, and 
this created a great deal of interest. But the most 
attractive example of an exposed Wasp's nest I have 
ever seen was suspended in a birch bush over water 
along the west bank of the pretty Crinan Canal, near 
Ardrishaig, Argyllshire, in September, 1922. I observed 
the beautiful tapered structure when saiUng up the 
canal to Crinan on board S.S. Linnet, and several 
passengers whose attention I called to it remarked that 
it was like a small Chinese-lantern. When I walked 
back along the waterway later in the day, I had a closer 
inspection of my treasure. I found it was most cleverly 
suspended from a pliant branch right over the water, 
and that the occupants were busily going in and out 
through a hole at the base. I was much tempted to 
dislodge the nest, but hardly cared to venture without 
first dealing with the owners, and I had reluctantly to 
leave it behind. 

The Tree Wasp (Vespa norvegica) always suspends 
its nest from the branches of trees and bushes, but the 
Mud Wasp [Odynerus parietum) which, as will be seen, 
belongs to a different genus, adopts entirely different 
methods. The cell walls are built of mud, and the 
nest, as a rule, is placed in any suitable hole. I know 
of three curious places, one in the centre of a reel of 
cotton, a second in a blind-tassel, and a third was placed 
in a roll of canvas, the group of cells being attached 
H 93 



BRITISH INSECTS 



together on the flat surface of the material. The mud 
had hardened like cement, and each cell was well cal- 
culated to stand considerable pressure. 

The Anthophila, or Flower-Lovers (Bees), next claim 
attention, and the first of these is the Leaf-Cutter Bee 
{Megachile centiincularis , Fig. 43). There are a very 




rLJ-V3 Le<if-cu.lT(irE)C£/. 



large number of species, and all of them burrow in 
earth, or soft wood, and line same with the leaves, or 
petals, of flowers. The Leaf- Cutter Bee is a small 
black insect relieved with white down, and the circular 
pieces of leaves cut from rose and other trees will pro- 
bably have been noticed. This is the work of this 
species. The pieces are neatly cut off" by the aid of 
the Bee's long, four-toothed mandibles, and are col- 
lected as soon as a burrow has been excavated ready to 
receive them. Piece after piece is carried to the burrow 
or tunnel, and a series of thimble-like cells are eventually 
formed, each cell fitting into another until there is a 
row of them. In each cell an egg is laid, with a small 
cake of honey and pollen for the larva to feed upon 
when hatched. There may be eight or ten of these 
94 



THE HUMBLE BEES 



thimble-cells all fitting into one another, and when 
seen for the first time the observer may well be puzzled 
as to the identity of the maker. This is a solitary species 
of Wild Bee. 

Of Humble Bees there are many and various. 
They are a characteristic feature of the English country- 
side, and although often discovered in a semi-stupified 
condition (due to a super-abundance of nectar), there 
is something about this gay and fussy insect-reveller 
which is particularly attractive. 

The Yellow-Banded Humble Bee {Bomhiis terrestrts, 
see Coloured Plate H.), may be chosen to represent its 
useful race, as the Genus Bomhus is of prime necessity 
in the fertilisation of flowers which require visits from 
long-tongued insects such as these. Clover depends 
entirely upon fertilisation by these indispensable agents, 
of which there are at least eighteen British species. 
The droning flight, fussy mannerisms, great industry, 
love of gardens (especially in Autumn when the Michael- 
mas daisies are in blossom), and variety of dress, are 
obvious features of interest. The present species usually 
makes its nest below ground, and the cone-shaped cells 
are massed together in a very diff'erent manner to those 
of the insects recently described. The male Humble 
Bee does not possess a sting. 

Disused birds' nests are sometimes resorted to as a 
nesting site by some kinds of Humble Bees, and I have 
known of one (and also that of a Wasp) which was placed 
in a bird-nesting box. The last of the stinging insects 

95 



BRITISH INSECTS 



to find a place in this volume is one of the most familiar 
and beloved of all. This is the Hive, or Honey Bee, 
{Apis mellifica, Figs. 44, 45, and 46). Of the usefulness 




\\i/ 




one. 




ficj'A-b Vvorker. 



I ri2. [ioney E)e^. 



of this species in fertilising flowers, and producing 
honey, little need be added. Of its industry, and won- 
derful communal and homing instincts, much might 
be written. Highly intelligent, and of great industrial 
importance, the Hive Bee has for centuries made a 
direct appeal to those who, in other directions, exhibit 
precious little interest in the world of insect-Hfe. It is 
probable that, as a result, more is known about these 
little busy-bodies than any other insect, and if, as a 
one-time neighbour of mine has well said (the late Pro- 
fessor L. C. Miall, F.R.S.), there are still problems to 
96 



HIVE, OR HONEY, BEE 



be solved concerning Apis mellifica, it is because its 
life-history and economy are of unparalleled complexity. 
The colony consists of Queen (Female), Drone (Male), 
and Worker (Imperfect Female), as shown in Figs. 44, 
45, and 46. The Queen deposits her eggs in the honey- 
comb, the egg being long and oval in shape. The grub, 
as in the Wasp, is fed by the Worker- Bee with a tasty 
sweetmeat-mixture of honey and pollen. Upon this, 
supplied in profusion, the grubs fatten and wax ex- 
ceedingly, changing their skins as occasion demands, 
and becoming full-fed in about a week. The cell is 
then sealed up with a porous cap capable of admitting 
air, a cocoon is spun by the larva, or grub, and in due 
course pupation takes place and eventually emergence 
is signalled. The Queen may be known by her longer 
body, the Drone by its stout body and large compound 
eyes, and the Worker is the smallest of the three. The 
last-named has pollen-baskets upon its legs, and these 
will have been noticed laden with goods ready for de- 
livery as the energetic little creature has been seen 
making its sweet pillage among the flowers. Only the 
Queen and Worker possess a sting. Flowers are visited 
for pollen and nectar, and, according to those in season, 
so are visits made to them. Much might be written 
from this point of view, such as the attractive properties 
of heather and lime flowers, of crocuses in early Spring, 
of apple and other fruit blossom. The wax from which 
the cells are so cleverly made is secreted by the Hive 
Bee in a " pocket," situate on the under side of the 

97 



BRITISH INSECTS 



abdomen, and the more the workers gorge themselves 
with food, the greater the supply of wax that ensues. 
The commencement of a comb is started by a single 
individual, but very soon other helpers are near at hand. 
Some cells are used as storehouses for pollen, others 
are utilised for storing honey. The former are left 
open, the latter are sealed up. Drone cells are larger 
than the Worker ones. Queen cells are large and clumsy. 
There is no waste of room or material. Economy is 
practised in all departments, except that of food-supply. 
The Queen, unlike many of her human prototypes, is 
retiring and shy. She is just a Queen in her own right. 
She dislikes pomp and ceremony, hates the light, and 
keeps, for preference, to her own select apartment. 
As a matter of fact, the Workers, as is fit and proper, 
control the Bee-Community, and the Queen herself is 
largely under their domain. Twice in her life the 
latter is roused to great activity. Mated she must be, 
and after she has been produced, she takes a flight in 
the air, and having met a husband, returns fertiUsed. 
Thereafter, she does not again forsake her faithful sub- 
jects until, or unless, she leaves the hive accompanied 
by a swarm of followers. If a second Queen makes her 
appearance there is a desperate conflict, and the weaker 
goes under. Sometimes the Workers consider it neces- 
sary to rear further Queens. If this happens, the old 
Queen asserts her rights, and much difficulty is ex- 
perienced in restraining her. If the Workers produce 
eggs, as they are able to and sometimes do, they always 
98 



RUBY WASP & GIANT-TAILED SAW-FLY 

yield Drones, but the Queen's eggs, when allowed to 
be fertilised by her, produce Workers, or Queens, and 
unfertilised eggs produce Drones. If food is scarce, 
owing to a wet, or cold, season, or other causes, the 
Drones are put to death, but in any case the latter are 
either driven from home after Mid-Summer, or the 
Workers nip off their wings. There may be a popula- 
tion of as many as 40,000 to 50,000 inhabitants in a 
thriving hive at the height of its prosperity. 

We now come to the Non-Stingers among these 
insect-folk, and in the Group Chrysidce the Ruby Wasp 
[Chrysis ignita^ Fig. 47) may here be mentioned. Al- 




fi^f vr Ruty Wocsp. 



though this insect is a non-stinger it can, as a matter 
of fact, puncture the skin, but it does not inject poison 
in the wound as with its stinging relatives which are 
possessed of poison-fang as well as a stiletto. It is a 
beautiful little insect, and may at once be identified by the 
brilliant ruby-red abdomen which has a pronounced 
metallic sheen. The inexperienced might well be excused 
if possessed of the belief that the Giant-Tailed Saw-FIy 
{Sirex gigas, Fig. 48) was capable of stinging, but this 

99 



BRITISH INSECTS 



is not so, in spite of the curious pointed object attached 
to the abdomen of the female. This is her borer, or 
augur, with which she makes a hole in a tree, and there- 
after lays her egg. It is a tool and ovipositor combined, 




F15A-3. Guaar- i ^acoFIy, JcmcU 



and this fine large insect is incapable of inflicting pain. 
It is sometimes called the Giant-Tailed Wasp, but it 
is a Sawfly, and only a distant relative of the more 
familiar insect. The larva eats its way into the wood 
of coniferous trees, and, as a rule, the latter are not in 
a healthy condition when attacked so that not much 
harm is perpetrated. The female measures about two 
inches in length, and has an expanse across the wings 
of two and a quarter inches. She and her mate are 
boldly banded with black and yellow. It is commoner 
in the fir and pine forests of the North than elsewhere, 
100 



THE GOOSEBERRY SAW-FLY 



but is not indigenous, having probably been introduced 
into Britain with timber from Norway. 

There is, however, a common representative of this 
Family Tenthredinidce in the South Country in the 
person of the Gooseberry Saw-Fly {Pteronidea ribesii. 
Fig. 49). The gregarious larvae will strip a currant or 




Gooseberry Oci^ii,'- 

gooseberry bush of all its leaves, and have a habit of 
hiding their bodies on the edges of, or underneath, the 
leaves. The adult occurs in April or May, and the 
female deposits her greenish eggs on the leaves. The 
larva feeds for about a month, and if not discovered 
in time, much harm will have been perpetrated. After 
having had its fill, the larva reaches the ground, spins 
a cocoon, and pupates. The perfect insect, or imago, 
emerges in about twenty-one days, and there are three 
generations in a season. It is interesting to notice 
that parthenogenesis occurs in this species, that is, 
unfertilised females can produce fertile eggs. The 
full-fed larva is light green, with orange colour on the 
first and last segments, and a very large pale coloured 
head, but at first it is profusely spotted all over with 
black. It has three pairs of true legs, and seven pairs 

101 



BRITISH INSECTS 



of claspers, twenty in all, and thus differs from a lepi- 
dopterous insect by having two extra pairs. The adult 
female has a brownish body, with a dark head, yellowish 
legs, and black feet. The male is black on the thorax 
and abdomen. 

We are nearing the end of our story as we reach the 
Cynipidce, or Gall-Wasps, and, as a familiar example, 
we may select the species which produces the well- 
known oak-apple. We can popularly term it the Oak 
Apple Gall-Wasp, and the insect responsible for the 
production of this curious formation upon the oak is 
Biorrhiza pallida. The full story is a fascinating one, 
and can only be briefly related. It is a story of alterna- 
tion of generation, that is, a term applied to the breeding 
of certain insects (such as Gail-Flies and Aphides, for 
example) when sexual and asexual generations are pro- 
duced alternately, these generations usually being quite 
different in appearance and habits. In the case of the 
Oak Apple Gall- Wasp, one generation appears above 
ground (resulting in the production of the oak apple), 
the other occurs upon the roots hidden beneath the soil. 
The wingless female insect which emerges from the 
hard round galls upon the roots makes her way above 
ground early in the year, climbs the bole of the tree, 
finds the Winter buds, punctures them, and deposits 
an egg in each incision made. She then dies. In due 
course the eggs hatch. The producer of these eggs 
had never been fertilised for, in her generation, there 
is no male issue, but from the eggs deposited by her, a 
103 



THE OAK-APPLE GALL-WASP 



virgin-female, male and female insects are brought 
forth. The male of this generation has wings, the 
female is wingless. Mating takes place, and when this 
is over, the wingless female crawls down the bole of 
the tree up which her mother ascended before her, and 
makes her way below ground to the roots. Having 
safely found her way there, she proceeds to puncture 
the roots, lays an egg in each hole she makes, and then 
dies. These eggs eventually hatch into wingless females 
as already described, and there is no male issue in what 
we may call the root-gall-generation. The larvae in 
both forms of gall are well shielded inside their snug 
retreat, and do not emerge until such time as the hour 
has arrived when it is best, or most essential, for them 
so to do. The adult in both generations is a small 
insect very rarely seen, but in spite of its stature, the 
results produced on oak trees are often prominently 
displayed during early Summer when the spongy ex- 
crescences are to be seen. With the exception of the 
author's old friend, the late Edward Connold of never-to- 
be-forgotten memory, and Mr. E. W. Swanton, few 
British Entomologists have specialised in galls and their 
producers. There is ample scope and a wide field 
here for the young worker, as the many other galls upon 
the oak, the curious fibrous growth upon the wild rose, 
and a great many others are at present imperfectly 
described, and deserve far more attention than they 
have received. The prominent bird-like " nests " upon 
birches, commonly called witche's-brooms, may have 

103 



BRITISH INSECTS 



been noticed by the reader, and wonder expressed as 
to the cause of them. In a way these are galls, caused 
by a fungus {Exoascus turgidus), but this does not come 
within our province to deal with here, and is only men- 
tioned as a matter of interest in passing. Of the Ichneti- 
monidce, their parasitism, and usefulness in keeping 
other forms of insect-life in check, much might be 
written, but as there are several thousand British species, 
the task is an impossible one on the present occasion. 
Perhaps one of the commonest Ichneumons is Ophioti 
luteus. It does not possess an English name. Some 
Ichneumons are very small, almost microscopic, others 
are two inches across the wings. As a rule, they have 
long thin bodies, and very long legs and antennae. The 
female Ichneumon Fly has a sharp-pointed ovipositor, 
and with this she punctures a hole in the larva of some 
other insect, and deposits an egg. The smaller Ichneu- 
mons lay several eggs in the body of the larva, the larger 
species only place one egg in the body. In a few days 
the Ichneumon larva hatches, and commences to feed 
upon the body of its host, leaving the vital parts until 
last. Meanwhile, the doomed host goes on feeding, 
until the inside tenant is ready to consume the remainder. 
This it does, and having become full-fed, and its host 
eaten up, it finds its way out of the larval skin (all that 
is now left of its host), and at once spins a yellow cocoon 
on the outside skin, and pupates. The perfect insect 
eventually emerges, ready to carry on the work of its 
ancestors, and it is perhaps of interest to note that, in 
104 



THE ICHNEUMONS 



the great world of insect-life, final consideration should 
be given to such important creatures as these Ichneu- 
mons, without whose useful aid human life would be 
far less pleasant, and the balance of Nature much more 
difficult to keep in check. 



105 



INDEX 

(To facilitate easy reference, the scientific names are all 
printed in italics, the remainder being in ordinary type.) 





Page 




] 


Page 


Aculeata . 


87 


Bee, 


Leaf- Cutter 


94 


Mschna xyanea . 


72 


>> 


Yellow-Banded 




Agriotes lineatus . 


52 




Humble 


95 


Amonophila campestris . 


89 


Beetle, Asparagus 


58 


Anax imperator . 


72 


)> 


Bean 


57 


Anohiidce 


50 


)> 


Bombardier 


39 


Ant, Black, or Garden 


89 


>> 


Burying . 


44 


„ House 


89 




Carnivorous 




„ Red Meadow 


87 


> J 


Ground 


39 


,, Solitary 


89 




Carrion . 


44 


„ Wood 


89 


>t 


Cellar . 


1 1 

59 

59 

52 
40 

50 


„ Yellow 
Anthonomtis pomorum 


89 
54 




Churchyard 
Click 
Cocktail 
Death- Watch . 


Anthophila. 

Aphides 

Aphis, Woollv . 


94 
34 
36 


>> 
>> 
>> 


Apis mellifica 


. 96 


>> 


Devil's Coach- 




Apple Sucker 


36 




Horse 


40 


Aptera 


8 


>> 


Dor 


48 


Aromia moschata 


■ 56 


>> 


Elm-Bark 


55 


Astinomus cedilis 


57 


j> 


Glow-Worm . 


51 


Atropos divinatoria 


. 61 


)> 


Great Black 

Water 


43 


Baker's Brat 


14 


i> 


Great Brown 




Balaniniis nucum 


55 




Water 


41 


Bee, Hive or Honey 


. 96 


«) 


Green Tiger . 


38 
107 



INDEX 





Page 




Page 


Beetle, Ladybird 


■ 45 


Bruchida . 


• 57 


,, Mealworm 


58 


Bruchus pisi 


. 57 


„ Musk 


. 56 


Bruchus rufimanus 


. 57 


„ Mustard . 


58 


Bug, Bed . 


. 29 


„ Oil 


53 


,, Lace- Winged 


29 


„ Pea 


57 


,, Land 


. 28 


„ Pine 


. 56 


„ Masked 


. 30 


„ Raspberry 


. 46 


„ Pentagonal Shielc 


29 


„ Rove 


43 


„ Shield 


• 29 


,, Sacred Scarab 


48 


Butterflies 


. 75 


,, Skipjack . 


52 


Byturus tomentosus 


. 46 


„ Soldier . 


52 


ByturidcB 


• 46 


„ Stag 


48 






,, Timberman 


57 


Calopteryx virgo 


■ 72 


„ Tortoise . 


60 


Campodea staphylinus 


12 


„ Violet Ground 


39 


Carabidce . 


39 


Whirligig 


40 


Carabus violaceous 


39 


Beetles 


38 


Cassia viridis 


60 


Bibio Marci 


. 79 


Cassididce . 


60 


Bihionidce . 


. 79 


Cecidomyia destructor 


■ 79 


Biorrhiza pallida 


. 102 


Cecidomyiidce 


78 


Bird Lice . 


14 


Cerambycidce 


56 


Biting Lice 


. 14 


Cercopidce . 


34 


Blaps mortisaga . 


. 59 


Cetonia aurata . 


47 


Blaps mucronata 


59 


Chafer, Garden 


47 


Blaptidce . 


59 


„ Rose 


47 


Blatta orientalis . 


20 


„ Summer. 


47 


Blattidce . 


20 


Chironomidce 


85 


Bombiis 


95 


Chrysidce 


99 


Bombus terrestris 


95 


Chrysis ignita 


99 


Bombylidce 


86 


Chrysomelidce 


58 


Bombylius major 


86 


Chrysop ccecutiens 


85 


Book Lice 


61 


Chrysopa per la . 


65 


Brachinus crepitans 


39 


Chrysopidcs 


65 


Bristle-tails 


II 


Cicadas 


34 



108 



INDEX 





Page 




Page 


Cicindella campeslris 


38 


Earwig, Lesser 


n 


Cimex colombarius 


30 


Elaterida . 


52 


Cimex hirundinis 


30 


Enallagma cyathigerum. 


72 


Cimex lectularius 


29 


Ephemera vulgaris 


66 


Cimex pipistrelli . 


30 


Ephemeroptera . 


66 


Clegg 


85 


Exoascus turgidus 


104 


Coccidce 


37 






Coccinellidce 


45 


Fish Insect 


12 


Cockchafer 


46 


Flea, Common 


76 


Cockroach, Common 


20 


„ Rat . 


78 


Coleoptera 


38 


Fly, Alder 


62 


Contarinia tritici 


79 


,, Autumnal Breeze 


. 85 


Corrodentia 


61 


,, Blinding Breeze . 


85 


Cricket, Field 


25 


„ Blow . 


82 


„ House 


23 


,, Caddis 


73 


Mole . 


22 


,, Camel 


65 


Crickets 


22 


,, Crane 


81 


Crioceris asparagi 


58 


„ Dragon 


69 


Cuckoo Spit 


34 


„ Dung 


79 


Culex pipiens 


79 


„ Fire 


51 


Culicidce . 


79 


,, Froth 


34 


Culicoides pulicaris 


85 


„ Gad . 


85 


Curculionidce 


54 


„ Golden-Eye 


65 


Cynipidce . 


, 102 


,, Hessian 


79 






,, Horse Bot . 


83 


Daddy Longlegs. 


81 


,, House 
Hover 


82 
81 


Diploptera 
Diptera 
Dog Louse 
Dragon Fly 
Dytiscidce . 
Dytiscus marginalis 


90 
. 76 

15 
■ 69 
. 41 
. 41 


,, Humble Bee 
,, Lacewing . 
„ May . 
„ Ox Warble . 
,, Rain Breeze 
,, Scorpion 


86 

65 

. 66 

. 83 
. 85 
. 64 






„ Sheep Nostril 


. 83 


Earwig, Common 


. 17 


,, Snake 


. 65 
109 



INDEX 





Page 




Page 


Fly, St. Mark's . 


79 


Humble-Bee Fly 


86 


„ Stone 


62 


Hydrometra 


30 


Forficula auricularia 


17 


Hydrophilidce 


43 


ForficulidcB 


17 


Hydrous piceus 


43 


Formica rufa 


89 


Hylurgus piniperda 


56 


Fossores 


89 


Hymenoptera 


87 


Frog Hopper 


34 


Hypoderma bovis. 


83 


Fulgoridce 


34 


Hypoderma lineatum . 


83 


Gall Midges 


79 


Ichneumonidcs 


104 


Gall- Wasp, Oak Apple 


102 


Isotoma fimetaria 


10 


Gall-Wasps 


102 






Gastrophilus equi 


83 


Japyx solifugtis , 


12 


Geotrupes stercorarius . 


48 






Gerridce 


30 


Labia minor 


17 


Gnat, Common 


79 


Ladybird, Eyed . 


45 


Grasshopper, Commor 


I 26 


,, Seven-Spot 


• 45 


„ Great Gree 


n 26 


,, Two-Spot . 


45 


„ Long-Horn 


led 25 


Lamellicorns 


46 


„ Short-Horr 


led 25 


Lampyridcs 


51 


Green Fly 


34 


Lampyris noctihica 


51 


Gryllidce . 


22 


Lantern Flies 


34 


Gryllotalpa 


22 


Lasius flavus 


89 


Gryllus campestris 


• 25 


Lasius niger 


89 


Gryllus domesticus 


. 23 


Lepidoptera 


. 75 


Gyrinidce 


■ 41 


Lepisma saccharina 


12 


Gyrinus natator . 


• 40 


Libellula depressa 


• 72 






Lipoptena cervi 


. 84 


Hcematopota pluvialis 


• 8s 


Locustidce . 


. 25 


Hemiptera . 


. 28 


Lucanidce . 


■ 49 


Heterogyna 


. 87 


Lucanus cerviis . 


. 48 


Hippobosca equina 


. 84 






Hippoboscidce 


• 84 


Mallophaga 


• 14 


Homoptera 


. 33 


Mantidee . 


20 


Hornet 


90 


Mayfly 


. 66 


Horse Stinger 


. 69 


Megachile centunciilaris 


. 94 


110 









INDEX 



Meloe proscarabceus 
Meloida 

Melolontha vulgaris 
Mehphagus oviniis 
Merodon 
Midge, Corn 
„ Gall 
Midges 
Moths 

Musca corvina 
Musca domestica 
Muscidce . 
Mutilla europcea 
Myrmica molesta. 
Myrmica rubra . 

Nepa cinerea 
Necrophorus vespillo 
Neuroptera 
Notonecta glauca . 

Oak Apple Gall-Wasp 
Ocypus olens 
Odonata 

Odynerus parietum 
Q^stn'dce 
CFsirus ovis 
Ophion luteus 
Orthoptera 
Osmylidce . 
Osmylus chrysops 

Panesthia javanica 
Panorpa communis 
Panorpidce 



Page 

53 

54 
46 

84 

82 

79 

79 

84 

75 
82 

82 

82 

89 

89 

87 

32 

44 
60 

30 

102 
40 
69 

93 
83 

83 

104 

16 

65 
65 

21 
64 
64 



Papirius 

Perlidce 

Phcedon cochlearia 

Phasgonura viridissima 

Phasgonuridce 

PhasmidcB 

Philcenus spumarius 

Phryganea grandis 

Phyllopertha horticola 

Pissodes notatus . 

Planipennia 

Plecoptera . 

Pond Skater 

Psylla mail 

Pteronidea ribesii. 

Pulex irritans 

Pulicidce 

Pyrrhosoma nymphula 

Raphidia cognata 
Raphidiidce 
Rhizoirogus solstitialis 
Rhynchota 

Saw-Fly, Giant-tailed 
„ Gooseberry 
Scale Insects 
Scarabeeidce 
Schizoneura lanigera 
Scolytidce . 
Scolytus destructor 
Sheep Ked 
Sialida 
Sialis lutaria 
Silphidce . 



Page 

10 
62 

58 
26 

25 

19 

34 

73 

47 

55 
64 

62 

30 
36 

lOI 

76 

77 
72 

65 

65 

47 
28 

99 

lOI 

37 
46 

36 

55 

55 

84 
62 

62 

44 
111 



INDEX 



Sir ex gigas 
Springtails . 
StaphylinidcB 
Stenobothrus bicolor 
Stenopteryx hirundi?iis 
Stick Insects 
SyrphidcB . 
Syrphus albostriatus 
Syrphus ribesii . 

Tabanidce 
Tabaniis aiitumnaUs 
Tabanus bovinus . 
Tachinidce . 
Telephorus fiiscus 
Tenebrio nioUtor 
Tenebrionidce 
Tenthredinidce 
Thermophila fiirnorum 
Thysanura 
Tipula oleracea 
Tipulidce . 



Page 

99 

9 

43 
26 

84 

19 
81 

81 

81 

85 
86 

86 

82 

52 
58 
58 

lOI 

14 
II 

81 

81 



Trichodectes lattis 
Trichoptera 

Vespa crabro 
Vespa germanica 
Vespa norvegica 
Vespa sylvestris . 
Volucella . 

Wasp, Digger or Sand 

,, Larger Common 

„ Mud 

,, Ruby 

,, Tree 

„ Wood 
Water Boatman 
Water Measurer 
Water Scorpion . 
Weevil, Apple Blossom 

Nut 
Wireworms 

Xenopsylla cheopsis 
Xestobium rufovillosum 



Page 

15 
73 
90 

91 

93 
92 

82 

89 
90 

93 
99 

93 

92 

30 

30 
32 
54 
54 
52 

78 
50 



^ Westell, V.'illism Percival 
4.32 British insects (general) 
GTW/V 

Biological 
k MedicAl 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



